      Chapter 6
Lives of the Enikolopians: Multilingualism and
the Religious-National Identity of a Caucasus
Family in the Persianate World

        Hirotake Maeda


Peoples of the Caucasus played significant roles in the various Persianate poli-
ties. Especially after the introduction of the gholam corps and the Armenian
merchant community in the early seventeenth century, we can detect a steady
flow of Georgians and Armenians to and from their communal existence at the
core of the Persianate empires.1 They were not outsiders, foreigners, or guests.
Rather they were bearers of cross cultural knowledge and often consisted a
leading part of Persianate intellectuals and elite components of the society.
However, the establishment of national divisions in the twentieth century
seriously damaged the historiography, not to mention the real lives of those
border-crossing peoples. This article aims to shed clear light on the reality before
the age of nationalism and the nation-state. The calculated neglect of ethno-
religious minorities in historical memory is widely evident in various modern
polities around the globe. Thus this study contributes to recuperating the di-
verse and multi-faceted nature of pre-modern societies. It also demonstrates
that the flexible and spontaneous adaptation of peoples of mixed heritage was
a unique historical phenomenon produced in the Persianate world. The curi-
ous fate and survival strategies of one Armenian family from Georgia provide
us with many insights into the middle ground between family and states, and
(minority) nations and empires, which would contribute our understanding of
“Eurasian history” after a century or so of a “national(ized)-interlude.”
  The Enikolopian family, meaning “Language Box” in Georgian, broadened
their activities in the nineteenth century by exploiting their traditional multi-
lingual skills which were cultivated and preserved in their family profession.2

1  On Safavid policy towards Georgia, see Hirotake Maeda, “Exploitation of the Frontier: The
   Caucasus Policy of Shah ʿAbbas I,” in Iran and the World in the Safavid Age, eds. Willem Floor
   and Edmund Herzig (London: I.B. Tauris, 2012), 471–489. On the Armenian merchant com-
   munity, see the works of Levon and Shushanik Khachikyan, Vazken S. Ghougassian, Edmund
   Herzig, Ina Baghdiantz McCabe, and Sebouh David Aslanian.
2  As discussed below, this family name consists of Georgian words and many variants exist in
   Georgian, Armenian, Persian and Russian. In the Soviet Armenian Encyclopedia, the name is


© Hirotake Maeda, 2019 | doi:10.1163/9789004387287_008
This is an open access chapter distributed under the terms of the CC BY-SA 4.0 license.