170                                                 Maeda

The activities of the family members contained cross-cultural features from
the beginning, and are beyond the framework of nationalized history and
­nationalized historians. Their family history is complex and we have to scru-
tinize the sources written in various languages, including Persian, Georgian,
Armenian, and Russian, at least, to reconstruct it. Some of their family mem-
bers and close relatives rose to prominence in Iran, as well as in Russia,
including the celebrated Qajar courtiers Manuchehr Khan Moʿtamad al-
Dowleh (?–1847)3 and Solayman Khan Saham al-Dowleh (?–1853) in Iran, and
Mikhail Loris-­Melikov (1824–1888) in Russia (this fact has not drawn enough
attention).4
   This essay reconsiders the history of Caucasia’s peoples from a much broad-
er regional perspective and tries to integrate (not separate) their history across
national borders to present a unified historical sketch across the region and
neighboring empires. Thus the study has a trans-imperial and transnational
nature. At the same time, by following their lives and mapping the physical and
mental boundaries of these imperial subjects, we also can assess the impact of
the Russian advance and the regional reorganization of the early nineteenth
century. The Enikolopian family’s activities between empires are another story
of the Great Game, for the Caucasus, being situated at a hub of the Eurasian
continent, became contested territories among globalizing European powers
in the nineteenth century. There were many examples of the forced deporta-
tion of indigenous populations and huge demographic changes which influ-
enced the make-up of local society. We should avoid a narrow interpretation
based on a nationalized history which, unfortunately, prevails because of to-
day’s political turmoil and the Soviet historical legacy. For Iranian history too,
we should avoid conspiracy theories and “imperial agency-ness” – how they


   rendered as V. Diloyan, “Yenikolopeanner/Enikolopyanner.” Haykakan sovetakan hanragita-
   ran (Armenian Soviet Encyclopedia), (Yerevan, 1977), vol. 3: 517. In this article, I give preference
   to “Enikolopian.” On this family see also Hirotake Maeda, “Transcending Boundaries: When
   the Mamluk Legacy Meets a Family of Armeno-Georgian Interpreters,” in Constellations
    of the Caucasus: Empires, Peoples, and Faiths, ed. Michael A. Reynolds (Princeton: Markus
   Wiener Publishing Inc, 2016), 63–85.
3  He was a Georgian eunuch of great political talents. Abbas Amanat, Pivot of the Universe:
   Nasir al-Din Shah and the Iranian Monarchy (London and New York: I.B. Tauris, 1997), 40, 45.
4  Loris-Melikov was the Minister of Interior at the court of Aleksandre II. Andreas Kappele,
   The Russian Empire: A Multi-ethnic History, tr. Alfred Clalyton (Harlow: Longman, 2001), 301;
   Austine Lee Jersild, “From Savagery to Citizenship: Caucasian Mountaineers and Muslims
   in the Russian Empire”, in Russia’s Orient: Imperial Borderlands and Peoples, 1700–1917, eds.
   Daniel R. Brower and Edward J. Lazzerini (Bloomington and Indianapolis: Indiana University
   Press, 1997), 103–108, 112.