Lives of the Enikolopians                                             173

relate that Griboedov’s corps were first sent to Echmiadzin with relatives of
the Enikolopian family, and that it was an arrangement of an Iranian courtier
of Enikolopian origin, namely Manuchehr Khan.13 In that article, Manuchehr
Khan is identified as a son of the above-mentioned Gurgen Khan.
   It is not certain why Ivane Enikolopov refrained from delving into his fam-
ily’s history in a 1954 publication.14 Although it was not his main subject, so-
cial circumstances could have influenced his work. For example, Enikolopov
expressed his deep regret when he reviewed a book on Russo-Iranian rela-
tions, accusing the author of “neglecting the endeavors of the Armenians and
Georgians in the defense of the fatherland.”15 Ironically, however, the social
atmosphere represented by Enikolopov’s usage of the word “fatherland” (sam-
shoblo in this Georgian article) did not easily permit him to reveal his fam-
ily’s activities fully in his lifetime, probably because it dealt with “dangerous”
Islamic connections and the existence of converted relatives. Enikolopov was
born in 1888, the same year that his close relative (his uncle’s wife’s brother)
Mikhail Loris-Melikov died, and lived most of his life during the complicated
times of the twentieth century, with its revolutions and wars.
   Still this gap of information is striking given that Enikolopov lived and died
in Georgia, and was one of the few Armenian representatives of Georgian
society mentioned in the Georgian Soviet Encyclopedia. He also helped pre-
vent the sale of Shota Rustaveli’s portrait in 1922.16 We certainly admit how


     and his son Mikhail as Griboedov’s friends in the abovementioned book, ibid. 26–27. He
       also mentions Manuchehr’s other half-brother Agalo Enikolopian as a chief administra-
       tor in Armenians in Qajar Azerbaijan province. I. Enikolopov, Griboedov i Vostok (Erevan:
       Aipetrat, 1954), 20. Kelly used three books of Enikolopov (Yenikolopov), but never re-
       ferred to the family name of Manuchehr Khan. Laurence Kelly, Diplomacy and Murder in
      Tehran: Alexander Griboyedov and Imperial Russia’s Mission to the Shah of Persia (London:
        I.B. Tauris, 2006).
13    In this well-known tragedy, Solomon Melikov, Griboedov’s assistant in the embassy
     and a nephew of Manuchehr Khan, was killed. Mourning her grandson’s murder,
      Manuchehr’s mother soon passed away. Both corps were sent to Echmiadzin to cross the
       border. I. Enikolopov, “Griboedov i semʾya Enikolopovykh: k 175-letiyu so dnya rojdeniya
       A.S. Griboedova,” Literaturnaya Armeniya, no. 1 (January 1970), 81–85 (the manuscript of
       this article is preserved in Matenadaran fond 151-1-155).
14   Judging from my investigation and interviews with his relatives in Tbilisi, Moscow,
     and Cambridge (Massachusetts), and the documents preserved in the Matenadaran
     (Armenian State Archive), I. Enikolopov possessed many materials at his disposal which
     made it possible to reconstruct his family history.
15     I. Enikolopashvili, “Griboedovis diplomatiuri moghvatseoba (The Diplomatic Activities of
      Griboedov),” Mnatobi (The Light), 10 October 1960. He criticized L.V. Shostakovich.
16   Anonymous, “ivane enikolopovi/enakolopashvili konstantines dze” (Ivane Enikolopovi/
      Enakolopashvili, son of Konstantine), ed. Kʿartʿuli Sabchotʿa Entsʿiklopedia (Georgian