Lives of the Enikolopians                                             175

­author devoted more than fifty pages in his 400-page volume to Manuchehr
Khan, an Armenian by origin but a Muslim convert eunuch, and from an azn-
auri, or Georgian landed nobility background (so he was called the Georgian/
Gorji in Persian sources). As it happens, the Enikolopians’ family story was
widely known in the nineteenth century. We again note how deeply the na-
tionalized way of thinking penetrated into the historiography of the twentieth
century as this interesting work is now mostly forgotten.
  The author  of  the book,  Galust Shermazanian  (Galust Arutyunyan
Shermazan-Vardanyants or Shermazan-Vardanov), was born in 1814 in old Julfa
situated along the Aras River. His father Arutyun Vardanyants was a trader who
had close ties with the Qajar court. He was later given the name Shermazan.
After that, Shermazanian was added to their family name. In 1818, he moved
to Tbilisi at the invitation of Nerses Ashtaraketsi who played an important
role in the Armenian community in Russia and Russia’s Caucasian policy. He
then became an active benefactor of St. Nerses Seminary established by Nerses
Ashtaraketsi.21 In 1825–1829, his son Galust studied at this seminary and start-
ed his cultural activities, writing a play and acting on stage.22
  Galust became his father’s agent and took control of the family business,
shuttling between Leipzig and Iran. By acquiring a knowledge of German,
he continued to be quite active in cultural activities. Even during his stay in
Iran, Galust established a theater (called the Shermazanian Theater/Darbaz
Shermazanyantsa) in Tbilisi and played an important role in Tbilisi’s cultural
life.23 On the other hand, having resided in Tabriz, for a long time the most
flourishing town in Iran, Shermazanian acquired the title tojjarbashi ­(meaning

      mainly analyzed. Harden made some use of this source. Evelyn J. Harden, The Murder of
      Griboedov: New Materials (Birmingham: University of Birmingham, 1979).
21    Before serving as the Catholicos of the Armenian Apostolic Church between 1843 and 1857,
      Nerses Ashtaraketsi was once the leader of Diocese of Georgia from 1814 to 1828. On his
         life, see V.G. Tunyan, “Zashitnik Otechestva”-Katolikos vsekh Armyan. Nerses Ashtaraketsi.
       1826–1857, Erevan: Sv. Echmiadzin, 2007.
22   For the life of Galust Shermazanian, see Sambel Karapetyan, Mery Tiflisa (Tbilisi) (Erevan:
      Gitutyun, 2003), 52–60.
23    In 1860, he returned to Tbilisi and was selected to serve as Tbilisi’s civil mayor in 1864.
        It was the first time a so-called new citizen, akhalmosul (meaning “newly arrived” in
      Georgian), was selected for this post, who did not come from the (old) citizens called
      mokalake (meaning “city folk” in Georgian). He was a major representative of Armenian
       society in nineteenth-century Tbilisi in terms of his intellectual and economic activities.
     He was also known as a bibliophile. See A.P. Berje, “Biblioteka Kallusta Shirmazaniyana
      (syna armyanskogo vykhodtsa iz Persii v Rossiyu),” Kavkaz (1856), 29–31. On his dismissal,
      Suny, The Making of the Georgian Nation, 120. Briefly on mokalake, also see ibid, “Eastern
     Armenians under Tsarist Rule,” in The Armenian People from Ancient to Modern Time, ed.
      R.G. Hovannesian, 2 vols. (New York: St. Martin’s Press), vol. 2: 114.