176                                                 Maeda

“head of merchants” in Persian). As a frequent guest of Qajar courtiers of
Enikolopian origin, Shermazanian himself witnessed many events. He not
only associated personally with many Enikolopians in Iran, but Shermazanian
also was related to this family through the second wife of Manuchehr’s elder
half-brother, Mirza Rostam. His informants were Aghalar Khan in Tabriz and
Solayman Khan (Solomon) in Tehran, both belonging to the Enikolopian fam-
ily (Manuchehr’s elder half-brother and nephew).24 Thus his description on
the family is a high-quality source on this family.


3     The Origins of Enikolopiants

Only by choosing and comparing the information from various sources in
multiple languages can we construct a more reliable family history of the
Enikolopians. Besides Shermazanian’s Armenian description we have a Persian
chronicle and a Georgian document at our disposal to reconstruct the family ge-
nealogy. First we must probe the detailed descriptions made by Shermazanian
(see genealogy B, based on Shermazanian’s description). According to him
a certain Vehen Mamikonian (B-1) from the ruling family of Sasun (today a
district in the Batman Province of Turkey) fled to his relatives in Siunik (or
Syunik, today situated in the south of the Republic of Armenia). These rela-
tives were the offspring of Siunik’s ruler Elikum and established a family line
there. Among his descendants, Mirza Zohrab, or Zurab Mamikonian (B-2),
who was born in the first half of the seventeenth century, had linguistic talent.
He knew Persian, Arabic, and Armenian, and went to Georgia to serve as trans-
lator while acquiring knowledge of Georgian as well. The title of mirza was
held by a person who was trained as a scribe in Persianate societies. Because
of his language skills, Zurab was given the additional family name of Enakolop
(language box) by the Georgian kings.25
  Shermazanian wrote that Mirza Zurab lived for more than a hundred years
and left two successors, Mirza Aftandil (B-3) and Tomas (B-4). Aftandil suc-
ceeded Zurab as a translator and also lived for more than a hundred years. His
successor was Mirza Papik (B-5) and his successors were Azaria (B-6) and Mirza
Gurgen (B-7). Azaria also lived more than a hundred years and left Stepanos
(B-8). Their sons were Jhangirn (B-9) and Mikayel (B-10). Mirza Gurgen be-
came a translator and by his first wife had four sons, Mirza Ghahraman
(Qaraman) (B-12), Mirza Rostam (B-13), Mirza Abraham (Abrama) (B-14), and

24   Shermazanian, Nivter azgayin patmutean hamar, 201.
25   Shermazanian, Nivter azgayin patmutean hamar, 201–202.