182                                                 Maeda

Tarikh-e Naderi) in 1802 in Tbilisi.42 After the annexation of eastern Georgia
(the Kartuli-Kakheti kingdom) by the Russian Empire in 1801, Ghahrama
moved to St. Petersburg with his patron and later received a pension from
Alexander I.43 Thus the eldest son remained a faithful servant of Georgian roy-
als abdicating from the throne.
  Gurgen’s third son Abraham (A-7, B-14, C-17, D-4) continued to be based in
Tbilisi.44 He became a Russian subject and kept working as an interpreter until
his death in 1836. As we see later in this article, he visited several times in Iran
to see his younger brothers but was always a part of diplomatic missions. As
a translator of Russian viceroy, Abrama should have been influential among
local society for there are many documents translated by him from Georgian to
Russian. Abrama’s son Mikhail (A-16, C-18, D-16) became a military officer and
participated in the Russo-Persian War, the Russo-Ottoman War and military
operations in the North Caucasus. He was in attendance for the peace trea-
ty signed at Torkmanchai.45 Abraham’s namesake grandson became Mikhail
Loris-Melikov (A-14, D-18)’s brother-in-law and Ivane Enikolopov (A-17, D-21),
mentioned above, was his great grandson. Thus Abrama and his successors
adapted to new situations, further cultivated ethno-national ties, and contin-
ued to flourish in the local society of Tbilisi.
  Unlike Ghahrama and Mikhail, Gurgen’s second son Mirza Rostam (A-6,
B-12, C-14, D-3) left for Iran and remained there in the service of Qajar shahs.46
Because his younger half-brother Manuchehr had no heir Rostam’s lineage
successively produced Qajar and even Pahlavi courtiers. Yet Rostam first had
close relationship with Russian courtier visiting Georgian king Erekle II. Then
he went to Vienna to learn military skills. After returning to Tbilisi, he decid-
ed to go to Iran for the release of his half-brother Manuchehr who became a
war captive and was made a Qajar eunuch courtier. He failed to liberate his
brother but instead was scouted to serve crown-prince ʿAbbas Mirza thanks
to his knowledge of Western military tactics. However his main role in the

42   The manuscript is preserved in the Institute of Oriental Studies in St. Petersburg.
      See R.R. Orbeli, Gruzinskie rukopisi institute vostokovedeniya, vypusk I (Moskva-Leningrad:
       Izdatelʾstvo akademii nauk SSSR, 1956), 68. I. Enikolopov edited the manuscripts of Prince
      David, mentioned above. I.K. Enikolopov, ed., “Dve zapiski Tsrevicha Davida ʿo luchshem
       ustroistve Gruzii,” Masalebi Sakartvelosa da Kavkasiis istoriisatis (Materials for the History
       of Georgia and the Caucasus), part I (Tbilisi, 1942), 121–165.
43   The anonymous Georgian genealogy.
44   Abraham was said to succeed in returning the once confiscated family land back to his
     hands in Erekle’s last days.
45   His career is described in detail in the order issued on 9 August in 1852. Matenadaran,
       151-1-347.
46   On his life, see Maeda, “Transcending Boundaries,” 71–74.