184                                                 Maeda

surrounded by six thousand Iranians. Most were killed. Revolt broke out in
Georgia and as most generals opposed continuing war, the Russian army re-
treated in September.51
  During this war, there was a volunteer army of Georgian nobles led by Ivane
Orbeliani.52 They battled troops under the Russian commander Tsitsianov but
by having a quarrel with the commander decided to return to Georgia. When
they departed Yerevan on August 4 with a large caravan, the Persian army, led
by Pirquli Khan Qajar and ʿAliquli Khan Shahsivan, suddenly attacked them.
Many Georgian tavadi-aznauris fell captive. Among them was the young
Armenian aznauri Chongur Enikolopian. He was presented to the shah with
other two Armenian boys (Andre Ghaitmazean of Tbilisi, later Khosraw Khan,
and Hakob/Yaʿqub Margarean of Yerevan) and three Russians. All became
eunuchs.53 In this troubled situation, Manuchehr cut a brilliant figure with
his knowledge of Turkish and his impressive character. When he was in the
presence of ʿAbbas Mirza, ruler of Tabriz and crown prince of Fath-ʿAli Shah,
Manuchehr asked the prince, “When I meet with the ruler of the East, what I
shall say about the generosity of the successor to the throne?” ʿAbbas Mirza
was surprised to hear this and gave them many gifts. Manuchehr then said,
“I will inform the ruler of the world of this.”54
   Besides his talents and unique background as an Armeno-Georgian noble,
Manuchehr was supported by some of his original family members at some
point. In comparison to the Safavid system of slave elites where systematic
incorporation and integration of Caucasian local elites is observed, the Qajar

51    Atkin, Russia and Iran, 76–77, 99, 120–121.
52   Ivane Orbeliani worked as lord chancellor (sakhltukhutsesi) of Kartli-Kakheti kingdom.
     He was from the first branch of the Orbeliani (= Qaplanshvili) family, the most pow-
       erful great noble (tavadi) of east Georgia. His capture is dated August 4 in the Soviet
      Encyclopedia of Georgia. Givi Jamburia, Kʿartʿuli pʿeodaluri urtʿiertʿobis istoriidan (From
      the History of Georgian Feudal Relations) (Tbilisi: Sakartvelos ssr metsnierebata akademiis
     gamomtsemloba, 1955), 148–149; Givi Jamburia, “Orbeliani Iovane (Ivane) Davitis dze
      (Orbeliani John, son of David),” Kʿartʿuli Sabchotʿa Entsʿiklopedia (1984), vol. 7: 558.
53   Shermazanian, Nivter azgayin patmutean hamar, 324–327. According to Shermazanian,
       Tsitsianov refused the Georgians’ demand for feeding their horses so the angered
      Georgians left the camp.
54   According to Shermazanian, Manuchehr later spoke of his early days. When he fell into
      Persian hands, he waited for his brothers’ help for liberation. But it was in vain. He then
      decided to collect as much money as possible because he thought the Russians would
      leave Georgia and return as their predecessors did. Then, only with his own riches could
     one go back to Georgia. So, on the journey from Tabriz to Tehran, Manuchehr left the gift
       of clothes untouched and sold them in Tehran. He was given some forty toman on the
     same journey and started a money-lending business in the haram and soon gathered a
     hundred toman. Shermazanian, Nivter azgayin patmutean hamar, 327–329.