186                                                 Maeda

  Manuchehr had already lost his wish to return but he was eager to spread
his influence. He embarked upon significant business activities with two other
prominent eunuchs, Khosraw Khan (Andre Ghaitmazean) and Aqa Yaʿqub
(Hakob Margarean).59 According to Shermazanian, Manuchehr used Stefan
of New Julfa and Samuel of Tbilisi as his agents. This shows how the slave
elites’ ethnic and local background played an important role. Their Armenian
trade network spread throughout all of Iran and the surrounding territories
through Tabriz, Astrakhan, Rasht, Constantinople, Baghdad, Bushehr, Madras,
and  Calcutta.60 More importantly Khosraw Khan’s grandfather  Philipo
Ghaitmazean (Gaitmazashvili) was a celebrated Armenian scholar in the ser-
vice of Georgian king Erekle II and was very active culturally, translating many
books from Armenian to Georgian.61 Thus, even if the capture of Chongur
Enikolopian (Manuchehr Khan) and Andre Ghaitmazean (Khosraw Khan)
eventually happened, both men exploited their unique backgrounds. Whether
or not the Qajar court recognized their origin from the beginning, it should be
stressed that their hybrid backgrounds as Armenian intellectuals in Georgian
noble society conditioned their various socio-political activities.
  Manuchehr’s activities were always connected with economics and di-
plomacy. In 1823 he became governor of Gilan, which was one of the main
silk-producing provinces with ports facing the Caspian Sea.62 After stabiliz-
ing the region’s order, he set up a commission composed of two Muslims and
two Russians with the intention of promoting trade. He also loaned money
to four Armenians in Tbilisi (Minas Hoja Minasean, Efrem Efrumean, Avetik



59   On the life of Khosrow Khan, see Hirotake Maeda, “Ḵosrow Khan Gorji Qajar (Andre
      Ghaytmazeants, b. Tbilisi, 1785–6; d. Tehran, 1857),” Encyclopaedia Iranica, Online Edition,
      20 April 2009, available at www.iranicaonline.org. Aqa Yaqub was captured and castrat-
     ed with Manuchehr and Khosrow too. He later sought refuge in the Russian embassy in
      Tehran, which caused a serious conflict and resulted in the death of Griboedov: Kelly,
      Diplomacy and Murder in Tehran, 187. Manuchehr’s nephew Solomon Melikov was also
       killed in the riot and Voskum Khanom died shortly after. With that of Griboedov, coffins
     were sent to Echimiajin via Tabriz, and the tombstone of Voskum still remains in Gayane
      Church. Enikolopov, “Griboedo i semʾya Enikolopovykh,” 83–85. In Harden’s The Murder
       of Griboedov, Manuchehr assumed the important role to solve the problems on Yakub’s
      return to homeland. Ibid. 33–34.
60   Shermazanian, Nivter azgayin patmutean hamar, 334–335.
61    P.M. Muradyan, Armyano-Gruzinskoie literaturnye vzaimootnosheniya v XVII veke (Erevan:
       Izdatelʾstvo AN Armyanskoikh SSR, 1966), 178–182. Philipo Ghaitmazean was a director of
      seminary in Telavi, the highest educational institution of Georgia at that period.
62   Yermolov demanded opening of the port in 1817. Rizaquli Khan Hidayat, Tarikh-e Rawzat
       al-Safa-ye Naseri, ed. Jamshid Kiyanfar (Tehran: Asatir, 1380 Sh. / 2001), vol. 14: 7725.