Lives of the Enikolopians                                             187

Mandinean, and Avetik Ghuzinean) to start trade between Russia and Iran.63
Manuchehr’s fame peaked when he played a definitive role in the succession
of Mohammad Shah in 1834. Manuchehr became the acting governor-­general
of Shiraz where he pursued his task of calming a local uprising with the
aid of English commander Henry Lindsay Bethune (1787–1851) and his nephew
(a son of Mirza Rostam) Solomon (Solayman in the Persian source). He then
governed Isfahan for nine years, where he died on February 9, 1847. He was
buried on the site of the tomb of Fath-ʿAli Shah.


7     Ambiguous Attitudes Toward Religion and State

In opposition to the established slave soldiers’ doctrine, I stress that the “slave”
elites or the imperial subjects in Iran with origins from the Caucasus were de-
pendent on their ethnic and local bonds (or their previous identity). As such,
Manuchehr’s origin as an Armenian from Tbilisi sometimes endangered his po-
litical life. Shermazanian describes Manuchehr’s sensitive attitude towards the
Russians in many places.64 According to him, Manuchehr did not agree about
the war with Russia. Once it was decided, Manuchehr never spoke of war in
the court. In addition, Manuchehr prohibited his family from saying anything
about the war even at home. His mother and sister’s son David Malikov were
barred from going to church and receiving Armenian guests (thus they were
allowed to go to churches in the time of peace). Manuchehr refused to be pres-
ent at court until at his request Fath-ʿAli Shah arrested those who blackmailed
him. Once the war ended, however, he played an important role in exchanging
war captives with Bayglar Khan.65
  As his brother Abraham was an interpreter of the Russian viceroy’s office in
Tbilisi, Manuchehr was charged with every kind of misdemeanor. Manuchehr

63   Shermazanian, Nivter azgayin patmutean hamar, 350–352. In a letter dated May 17, 1832,
     Manuchehr is mentioned as ruler of Gilan. N.G. Kukanov, ed., “Proshenie S.I.Posylina
      Aziatskomu departamentu ministerstva inostrennykh del,” Russko-iranskaya torgovlya,
      30–50-e rod y XIX veke: sbornik dokumentov, 280–281.
64    In 1817 when a famous general of the Caucasian front and viceroy A. Yermolov (1777–1861)
     was sent to Iran, Yermolov had two meetings with Manuchehr. As he had no presents
       for the shah’s wife, he asked Manuchehr to accompany him to buy presents. Manuchehr
      refused to do so as it was not his duty. Nevertheless, Yermolov tried to hand him the gifts
     (among the gifts entrusted for Yermolov’s will). Manuchehr would not receive them, say-
       ing, “If I could do any good for your county, your government would decide in advance
     and send them. But I do not know you and I can do you no good. So, I cannot take them
     from you.” Shermazanian, Nivter azgayin patmutean hamar, 343–344.
65   Shermazanian, Nivter azgayin patmutean hamar, 353–359.