188                                                 Maeda

was extremely careful as described above in these relations. However, it should
be stressed that their family relations were not secret and Manuchehr’s deli-
cate attitude towards Russians did not necessarily hamper his kin relations.
In 1832–1833, his elder half-brother Abraham was sent to the Qajar court by
Prince G. Rozen, Russian viceroy of the Caucasus. After having had an audi-
ence with the shah, Abraham traveled to Gilan where his younger half-brother
reigned. Abraham then went to Tabriz to see another younger brother Aghalar
Khan (B-15, C-20) and stayed there for ten days.66 Our Persian chronicle also re-
fers to Abraham’s visit to Persian court and trip to Gilan.67 Abraham once visit-
ed Iran after the Treaty of Golestan, which was concluded in 1813.68 Abraham’s
son Mikhail (born 1798–99) (A-16, C-18, D-16) was a military officer and par-
ticipated in the Russo-Iranian war. He was charged with the migration of the
shah’s Christian subjects to Russia according to the terms of the Torkmanchai
treaty, whose congress he had he attended. In 1828 he was awarded both by
Nikolai I and Fath-ʿAli Shah.69 These kin relations could be heavily influenced
by the diplomatic relations of the two empires but the importance of the con-
nection seemed to be recognized by broad audiences in both empires.
   It should be emphasized that the family deliberately connected themselves
not only with Russia but also with the Iranian state and religious society.
Manuchehr’s brother and nephews in Iran worked as his representatives in the
provinces and elsewhere. He was a great protector but could be harsh to his
relatives on sensitive issues. For instance, his nephew Gurgen (A-9, C-15, D-14),
a son of his elder half-brother Rostam, was sentenced to death on account of
being involved in the killing of a Muslim clergyman at his home.70 With the

66   Shermazanian, Nivter azgayin patmutean hamar, 360. Shermazanian was an eyewitness
       to the event since he accompanied Abraham on his return journey to old Nakhchevan.
67   Mohammad Taqi Lesan al-Molk Sepehr, Nasekh al-Tavarikh, ed. Jamshid Kiyanfar,
      (Tehran: Asatir, 1377 Sh. / 1998), 492–493.
68   There is a document dated September–October 1814, which was given to Abraham by
       Fath-ʿAli Shah.
69   His career is described in detail in a document dated in 9 August 1852. Among the sub-
       jects he studied were the Russian, Georgian, Latin, German, Persian, Tatar (Turkish), and
     Armenian languages.
70   Gurgen also played important role in Qajar politics. According to Shermazanian’s ac-
      count, Gurgen was raised as a priest, and knowing very well the rules of churches, he
       finally converted to Islam through the seduction of polygamy. He had thirty-two women
       at home. Gurgen loved drinking and his house was full of drinkers and was always noisy,
     which Shermazanian hated but described vividly because he was often Gurgen’s guest in
      Tehran in 1852–53. All of these negative views (at least described by Shermazanian), we
     know from his explanation that Gurgen was recognized as a full family member of the
      Enikolopians in Iran and played a significant political role by possibly uniting and culti-
      vating various levels of Muslim-Christian ties. Shermazanian, Nivter azgayin patmutean
      hamar, 284–294. Gurgen’s descendants were rooted in Iranian high society and Bahram