Lives of the Enikolopians                                           189

intervention of Manuchehr’s mother, Gurgen was entrusted to Manuchehr.
Manuchehr then used an old Armenian torture device that crippled his legs.
Voskum Khanum accused her son of being cruel hearted and said that news
would spread in Georgia that Manuchehr executed his own nephew and they
would think that the Enikolopian family’s honor was not enough to save the
life one Enikolopian. Shemazanian’s account reflects their ambiguous belong-
ing to these two empires.
   In the realm of religion we also observe various means of adaptation.
Having been raised as a priest, Gurgen became a Muslim imperial courtier.
By contrast, his elder brother Solomon/Solayman Khan (A-10, C-16, D-11), who
was once a Russian official, “escaped” to Iran for religious reasons and kept
the Armenian faith until his death. In his conversation with Shermazanian,
Solomon said he had been twelve or thirteen years old when Aqa Mohammad
Khan Qajar invaded Tbilisi. He escaped with great difficulty. Probably after
the abolition of the Georgian kingdom, Solomon entered the Russian army
and became an officer. At that time, Solomon heard that the Russian govern-
ment forced them to move to Russia and planned their forced conversion. He
was also in need of money. Solomon was in debt because his relatives did not
help him with his mother’s funeral. His brother Gurgen returned from Tabriz
and informed Solomon of ʿAbbas Mirza’s military reforms. After a few years
with his friends, the Georgian brothers David and Zaal Saginean,71 who were
also afraid of forced conversion, fled to Iran. So, one of their main reasons for
­escaping was fear of new rule in terms of religion.72
  Solomon took an active role in the domestic and foreign politics of Iran as a
provincial ruler and as the chief of foreign policy. It is important that journals

      Ariyana (1906–1985) was among his descendants. I thank Dr. Shariat and Dr. Afsaneh
      Gächter (Institute of Iranian Studies in Vienna) for this information.
71   According to Shermazanian, they embraced the Grigorian faith after their arrival in Tabriz
     and their children became Armenians.
72    It is difficult to confirm the existence of this rumor and its influence, but the religious sit-
      uation was especially fragile at that time. In 1811, Anton II, of the last Georgian Catholicos
       of eastern Georgia, was exiled to Russia and the Georgian Church was practically abol-
       ished. On the other hand, the strong pro-Russian Armenian cleric Nerses settled in Tbilisi
     and started his strong campaign for Armenian nationhood. The Russo-Persian war con-
      tinued, and in these circumstances Solomon finally made the choice to go to Iran. In early
        1811, Solomon and David asked his senior officer for permission to visit Tbilisi. The officer
      thought they wished to participate in wrestling and permitted them to go. They arrived
        first in Yerevan via Akhalkalaki and Giumri then finally arrived in Tabriz. They were not
     welcomed because no one knew of their arrival in advance. Moreover, when they met his
      uncle Aghalar Beg and an Armenian priest, they astonished the priest by starting to pray.
      Solomon’s father Rostam died just a week before their arrival. Aghalar helped Solomon to
      enter ʿAbbas Mirza’s army and in 1821, he became a major. Shermazanian, Nivter azgayin
     patmutean hamar, 377–380.