Lives of the Enikolopians                                                 191

communication skills gave them chances for not only survival but even for
obtaining prosperity. However, their activities should not be easily interpret-
ed as an example of a family business in the trading diaspora. Shermazanian
stressed Manuchehr’s connections with Armenians while a contemporary
Armenian author of New Julfa denied those special relations.76 Their religious
choices present us with an intricate picture resisting any simplified nation-
alist interpretation. It certainly depended on each person’s character (espe-
cially their view for survival) and surrounding socio-political situation. But
we should rather pay much attention to their multiple setting or provisions
for adaptation to the new socio-political realities. Among them was their in-
between character which was nourished in the mixed cultural legacies. This
is clearly observed in a quote attributed to Manuchehr’s mother Voskum
Khanum. When Fath-ʿAli Shah urged her conversion to Islam and mentioned
the example of Manuchehr and Gurgen, she replied modestly but clearly: “you
could refer to any name but never Gurgen for he was not with us, neither with
you. He is in the very center of hell.”77
  As is mentioned, they were always sensitive for any anticipated conflicts in
foreign politics and religions. Thus, we know that they were always conscious
about the lines between different types of personal attributes.78 It may sound
paradoxical, but Voskum Khanum’s words clearly show their multiple and
complex identities. They possessed identities as a eunuch and his relatives,
administrators, financiers, military figures, the Armenians from the Georgian
noble society, and so forth.79 They, in other words, nourished a trans-border
identity, their identities were shaped by multiple settings, and their linguistic
skills became the source for survival to the new situations. Their family bonds
were a most useful and needed identity when they crossed boundaries and
adapted to new situations. At the same time we also should take into account
that during the age of modernization, the state structure and its configuration

76   Harootun Der Hovhanian, Tarikh-e Julfa-ye Isfahan, trans. Leon G. Minassian and
      M.A. Mussavi Fereydani (New Julfa: Zende Rood & Naghsh-e khorshid, 2000), 340.
77    Nivter azgayin patmutean hamar, 330–331. Fath-ʿAli Shah laughed and never repeated this
      request again.
78    In other words, Voskum wanted to say that she kept the Armenian faith and Manuchehr
     became a faithful Muslim after conversion. They both acted as an Armenian and a Muslim
      should. However, only Gurgen is not counted as he became “bad Muslim.” It should have
     been an excuse for as we know Voskum harshly criticized her son when Gurgen was se-
       verely punished.
79   Even their ethnic attributions were complex. Manuchehr was called “the Georgian (gorji)”
      while his nephew Solomon was mostly identified as “the Armenian (armani)” in Persian
       sources. See the same example of Safavid gholams from the Armeno-Georgian landed
       nobility, the Mirimanidzes: Hirotake Maeda, “On the Ethno-Social Background,” 253–257.