Vaqaye'-e Ettefaqiyeh (1851–1861) and the Education of
the Iranian Nation in the Middle of the Nineteenth Century
Item Type Article
Authors Ebrahimian, Mojtaba
Citation Ebrahimian, M. (2020). Vaqaye'-e Ettefaqiyeh (1851–1861) and the
Education of the Iranian Nation in the Middle of the Nineteenth
Century. Iran, 1-17.
DOI 10.1080/05786967.2020.1713022
Publisher ROUTLEDGE JOURNALS, TAYLOR & FRANCIS LTD
Journal IRAN-JOURNAL OF THE BRITISH INSTITUTE OF PERSIAN
STUDIES
Rights Copyright © 2020 British Institute of Persian Studies.
Download date 11/04/2026 20:37:13
Item License http://rightsstatements.org/vocab/InC/1.0/
Version Final accepted manuscript
Link to Item http://hdl.handle.net/10150/637003
1
Vaqaye‘-e Ettefaqiyeh (1851-1861)and the Education of the Iranian Nation in the Middle of 
the Nineteenth Century 
Abstract
This article contributes to the discussions of the genesis of the print media in Iran by analysing 
the first official weekly gazette published for ten years in the country. It first, examines the 
present scholarship on Vaqaye‘-e Ettefaqiyeh, which disregards the official Qajar gazette as a 
mouthpiece of the government, portrays it as only one of the administrative reforms of Amir 
Kabir, or considers it a precursor to more noteworthy print media of the turn of the twentieth 
century. Then, building upon and expanding such scholarship, this article demonstrates that as 
the only form of print media in Iran, the Qajar gazette firstly, contributed to the popularisation of 
reading in Iran, and secondly, introduced Iranians, both those who bought and read it as well as 
those who heard it read aloud in public spaces, to the current proceedings of the Qajar court, 
historical developments outside Iran, and most importantly, modern technological and 
democratic developments in Europe and the New World.
Keywords: Vaqaye‘-e Ettefaqiyeh, Qajar Iran, Reading Public, Print Culture, Official Gazette
Introduction
The present scholarship on the ‘nineteenth-century Iranian cultural history does not 
adequately analyse Vaqaye‘-e Ettefaqiyeh (1851-1861) and its historical function. It considers 
the official gazette as a mere court bulletin, only one of the many reform measures of Amir 
Kabir, or a precursor to more significant press at the turn of the twentieth century. Through close 
readings of 471 issues of the official gazette, this article tries to historicise Vaqaye‘-e Ettefaqiyeh
and show that it played an important role in the popularisation of reading and the formation of a 
novel understanding of the national community in Iran, on the one hand, and in the introduction 
of Iranians to modern and democratic developments outside Iran, on the other hand.
Among the earliest scholarly analyses of Vaqaye‘-e Ettefaqiyeh, Edward G. Browne, 
Fereydun Adamiyat, and Yahya Arianpour present the gazette as one of the many reform 
initiatives taken by Mirza Taqi Khan Farahani (Amir Kabir) (1807-1852), but they do not 
sufficiently analyse its contents.1
 
1 Tarbiyat and Browne 1914: 10; in Fekr-e Azadi va Moqaddameh-ye Nehzat-e Mashrutiyat, Fereydun Adamiyat 
acknowledges the importance of the official gazette as part of the reform agenda of Amir Kabir and discusses the 
2
Such views are reflected in the recent scholarly works. For instance, in her analysis of the 
cultural reforms of the nineteenth century in Iran, Monica M. Ringer holds that the gazette was 
“clearly intended” to “serve as the mouthpiece” for the reforms of Amir Kabir, because “he 
hoped that greater knowledge of his reform program would result in political support amongst 
government officials.” 2It is true that the gazette was initially founded by the order of Amir 
Kabir, but it was run between 1851 and 1861 by various editors and writers under the aegis of 
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. The fact that it continued publication even after the assassination 
of Amir Kabir in 1852 shows that it was the brainchild of a group of reform-minded individuals, 
who had understood the importance of educating the nation through the print media.
Interestingly, Naser al-Din Shah himself was interested in the gazette and that is why even 
after ordering the execution of Amir Kabir in 1852, the monarch did not stop its publication. 
However, sponsorship of Vaqaye‘-e Ettefaqiyeh by a whimsical and arrogant king in this period 
meant that its editors and writers would change often. Thus, it is difficult to find all writers and 
editors of the gazette. Nonetheless, to demonstrate that the Qajar gazette was the work of a group 
of contributors, the following names can be mentioned.3
Mirza Jabbar Nazem ul-Maham, knowns as Tazkerechi was the editor in chief of the gazette. 
He was the erstwhile head of the customs (tazkereh) office in Azerbaijan of Iran, the Iranian 
general counsel in Baghdad, and the head of the government’s customs headquarters.4 He was 
also appointed as the supervisor of the affairs of the mines and factories in Iran. Since Amir 
Kabir knew and trusted Mirza Jabbar, he appointed him as the editor in chief and director of the 
government gazette in 1851.5In his job, Mirza Jabbar was aided by the Englishman, Edward 
Burgess, who selected and translated news from the Ottoman and European press for Vaqaye‘-e
Ettefaqiyeh. Burgess had arrived in Tabriz as a merchant with his brother. After his brother 
embezzled £30,000 entrusted to him by Abbas Mirza to purchase muskets and other military 
equipment from London in 1836, Edward stayed behind in Tabriz. He became the translator and 
tutor of royal princes in Tabriz, and, he was assigned to do translation work for the then Crown 
Prince, Naser al-Din. When Naser al-Din ascended the Persian throne as the new king in 1848, 
 
broad topics covered in Vaqaye‘-e Ettefaqiyeh; nonetheless, he does not address the specific ideas promoted in the 
gazette or the messages they targeted at their audience. Adamiyat 1961: 35-37; in Amir Kabir va Iran, Adamiyat 
analyses only the issues of the gazette published during the lifetime of Amir Kabir, which constitutes only one year 
of the gazette’s activity. Adamiyat 1984: 376; and in his classic anthology of modern Persian literature, Az Saba Ta 
Nima, Yahya Arianpour confers upon Amir Kabir the role of the founder and supervisor of Vaqaye‘-e Ettefaqiyeh. 
According to Arianpour, the Qajar gazette was established “according to Amir Kabir’s orders,” and “under his 
supervision.” Arianpour 1979: 237
2 Ringer’s book focuses on the impact of different governmental, non-governmental, and missionary schools on the 
expansion of literacy and introduction of cultural reforms in Iran; however, it does not discuss the contribution of the 
gazette on education and expansion of the nascent reading public in Iran. Ringer 2001: 69.
3
In different scholarly analysis of the gazette, these individuals are presented as the most important contributors to 
Vaghayeh-e Ettefaghiyeh.
4 Because of his extensive experience with the tazkereh offices, he became known as Tazkerehchi. 
5 Bamdad 2009: 233. 
3
he brought Edward Burgess with him to Tehran and in 1851, by the suggestion of Amir Kabir,
appointed Burgess as the translator for the government gazette.6 The contents of the gazette were 
handwritten by one Mirza Abdullah Khattat and it was published in Tehran by the printing house 
of Haji Abd al-Mohammad.7In their job, this group of Tehran-based writers and translators were 
aided by Iranian representatives inside and outside the country. The Qajar government had 
ordered the provincial officials to send news of their provinces to Tehran; moreover, the Ministry 
of Foreign Affairs had mandated its representatives abroad to send reports of weekly news in the 
country they served to the gazette’s office in Tehran.8
Another group of scholars of Iranian cultural history dismissively present the official gazette 
as a propaganda medium for the Qajar court, thus unworthy of serious discussion. For instance, 
Mohit Tabatabaei, Negin Nabavi, A. R. Sheikholeslami, and Zahra Ansari acknowledge the 
importance of Vaqaye‘-e Ettefaqiyeh as a new literary development in Iran; nevertheless, they
dismissively call it an official bulletin rather than a modern newspaper.9In Camron Michael 
Amin’s opinion, the gazette’s “news had the appearance of an imperial chronicle organised 
around traditional geographical descriptions of Iran.” In Amin’s view, its “portrayal of domestic 
harmony could, alongside digests of news from foreign news sources, serve both domestic and 
foreign policy goals.” 10 Therefore, his account also depicts the official gazette as serving 
specific domestic and foreign policies of the government. Interestingly, such views of the gazette 
as a mouthpiece of the court and at the service of the Qajar politics are in line with how some of 
the Qajar courtiers thought about the gazette in the nineteenth century. Almost fifty years after 
the establishment of Vaqaye‘-e Ettefaqiyeh, the editors of Al-Ma‘aser wa al-Asar, a book that 
commemorated forty years of sociopolitical progress under the reign of Naser al-Din Shah, 
remembered the establishment of the gazette as a way to inform Iranians about the politics and 
proceedings of the government.11 Such readings of the gazette, by the current scholarship or its 
contemporaries, is focused on the domestic news section of the gazette and highlights its role in 
promoting Qajar policies and presenting the government as progressive and powerful. 
 
6 Wright 1977: 96-98. 
7 Mahbubi Ardakani 1992: 248
8 Most of these people were highly educated and a great number of them were quite aware of modern and 
democratic developments outside Iran. Therefore, they were able to select news that addressed both the physical and 
the intellectual aspects of the modern developments outside Iran. 
9 Tabatabaei 1996: 26; Nabavi 2009; Sheikholeslami 1997: 24; despite her criticism of the gazette, Ansari admits 
that its physical presence in different locations in Iran for ten years was important for introducing Iranians to the 
idea of reading newspapers as a useful way to learn about domestic and foreign news. Ansari 2001: 22.
10 Amin 2014: 272.
11 Under a section called, “The Creation of Ruznameh,” the book announces, “The Official Ruznameh of a land is 
the mirror of the politics of the government there. One must hear about the conditions, news, situations, accidents, 
advancements, positions, levels, and progresses of the government from the language of the Ruznameh. The 
government of Iran did not have a publication before the appearance of this blessed reign and the government was 
bereft of the limitless features and advantages of it.” E‘temad al-Saltaneh 1896: 103.
4
Nevertheless, to understand the historical significance of the gazette, its foreign news section 
must also be considered. 
Another group of scholars of Iranian cultural history dismiss the official gazette because it 
does not reflect modern literary developments in Iran, as did the constitutional era journals. For 
example, in his study of the literary journals of the nineteenth and early twentieth century, 
Kamran Talattof considers the official gazette briefly and categorises Vaqaye‘-e Ettefaqiyeh as
part of “the few well-known but small temporary official or non-governmental publications.”12
Consequently, looking for the thematic and formal patterns governing the print media in Iran of 
the turn of the twentieth century, he overlooks the educational and literary importance of the 
gazette during its one decade of publication.
Among scholars of Iranian cultural history, Hussein Mahbubi Ardakani, Abd al-Mahdi 
Rajaei, and Mohamad Tavakoli-Targhi consider the Qajar gazette as a serious publication. 
Comparing the frequency and nature of the reformist and liberal ideas in the gazette with those of 
its successor, Ruzanameh-ye ‘Elmiyeh-ye Dawlat-e ‘Elliyeh-ye Iran, Ardakani maintains that 
Vaqaye‘-e Ettefaqiyeh was more liberal-minded and reformist. In his view, its successor mostly 
focused on Naser al-Din Shah’s domestic and foreign travels, court proceedings, and historical 
and religious reports.13 In a short article, ‘Abd al-Mehdi Rajaei focuses only on the foreign news 
section of the Qajar gazette and contends that it was instrumental in relaying enlightening and 
reformist ideas the Iranian public. In his opinion, the gazette’s portrayal of foreign modern 
developments offered “potent and attractive pictures of the West and its social and political 
orders” to its audience.14 However, since his analysis focuses merely on the foreign news section
of the gazette, it does not offer a comprehensive view of the gazette’s role in education of its 
audience through its domestic news section as well. And, Tavakoli-Targhi argues that the 
publication of “the official and non-official newspapers,” including Vaqaye‘-e Ettefaqiyeh, in the 
second half of the nineteenth century, “generated public knowledge and information vital to the 
formation of a critical national–public sphere.”15 In his analysis, the official and non-official 
publications in this period not only brought news of the court to the attention of a national public 
audience, but also, by creating public awareness of the proceedings of the court, they contributed 
to the generation of public criticism of the court’ procedures and decisions. 
Furthering the arguments of Ardakani, Rajaei, and Tavakoli-Targhi, this article focuses on 
both the domestic and foreign news sections of Vaqaye‘-e Ettefaqiyeh as the first regular 
publicly-available official gazette in Iran,16 and discusses the gazette’s role in the popularisation
of reading and the publicisation of court politics on the one hand, and the introduction of Iranians 
 
12 Talattof 2015: 416.
13 Mahbubi Ardakani 1992: 253-254.
14 Rajaei 2000: 76-77.
15 Tavakoli-Targhi 2001: 118.
16 Although Mirza Saleh Shirazi published for a few months a paper of news semi-officially in 1837, it was not 
sponsored by the Qajar court and thus, it cannot be considered the first official journal in Iran. Lorentz, 
“Modernisation and Political Change,” 207.
5
to major historical developments outside Iran, on the other hand. It shows that the gazette’s
educational and informative aspects were particularly important between 1851 and 1852 because 
simultaneous with the education of the children of the elite in Dar al-Fonun,
17 the official gazette 
was the only publicly available source of education for the national public. Therefore, studying 
the official gazette will shed analytical light on a significant chapter of the development of 
modern ideas in Iran. 
Proliferation of the Print Media and Formation of National Communities
The rise of the print media in any society is embedded in and reflects a cultural trend that 
intersects with contemporary social transformations. In the Iranian case, the publication and 
distribution of the official gazette was embedded in and contributed to the administrative and 
educational reforms, which had begun in early nineteenth century,18 and would lead to the 
constitutional movement of the turn of the twentieth century. The official gazette’s uninterrupted 
weekly publication and distribution between 1851 and 1861 laid the groundwork for the growth 
of the Iranian print culture, which, a few decades later, would become, in the words of Shiva 
Balaghi, “a significant component of Iran’s intellectual and political landscape.”19
To understand the significance of Vaqaye‘-e Ettefaqiyeh in its historical context, the views 
of Richard D. Altick, Marshall McLuhan, and Benedict Anderson on the connection between the 
proliferation of the print media and the rise of a new sense of national community are 
illuminating. In his pioneering work, The English Common Reader: A Social History of the Mass 
Reading Public, 1800-1900, Altick underscores the connection between the expansion of the 
reading public and the democratisation of politics in nineteenth-century England. He argues that 
“The history of the mass reading audience is, in fact, the history of English democracy seen from 
a new angle.”20 In his view, the possibilities created by the expansion of the popular reading 
public are intricately linked to the sociopolitical changes that lead to the establishment of a 
democratic society. Therefore, if we analyse the sources that inform and expand a society’s 
reading public, we can better understand the origins of its transition to democratic developments. 
In this light, any study of the nineteenth-century Iranian print media and their role in the 
education of Iranians about modern and liberal ideas is a study of the sources of political and 
social transformations that led to the Constitutional Revolution (1906-1911).21 Although 
 
17 It has been pointed out that in its first years of operation, the school exclusively admitted children of grandees and 
nobles. Menshari, Education and the Making of Modern Iran, 55.
18 For a detailed discussion of educational and cultural reforms in nineteenth century Iran see Ringer, Education, 
Religion.
19 Balaghi 2001: 165.
20 Altick 1998: 3.
21 For a comprehensive analysis of the social, cultural, economic, and political roots of the Constitutional 
Revolution, look at Afary 1996.
6
nineteenth-century Iran did not have a large reading public similar to that of nineteenth-century 
England, Altick’s view nonetheless applies to the Iranian case. The Qajar gazette was the only 
regularly published and publicly accessible print medium in Iran in the middle of the nineteenth 
century, and through its uninterrupted publication and its proffering of news of the Iranian court 
as well as the technological and liberal features of the modern foreign world, it inculcated in 
them a sense of belonging to a national community even as it introduced Iranians to domestic 
and foreign news. 
Altick further argues that the availability of the print media to a wide reading public, 
occasioned by nineteenth-century sociocultural developments in England, led to the 
popularisation of reading among the masses, “No longer were books and periodicals written 
chiefly for the comfortable few,” but the reading material found and actively sought to cater to 
“the ill-educated mass audience.”22 A similar observation can be made about the role of the Qajar 
gazette in the popularisation of newspaper reading, in particular, and reading, in general, in Iran. 
During a period that only a limited number of the courtiers and the elite were educated, the 
gazette reached a broad audience, and thus, it contributed to the education of a national public.23
In addition, through its simplified and accessible prose, which has been identified as simpler and 
more comprehensible compared to that of later pamphlets and journals, such as the articles of 
Mirza Malkom Khan,24 the official gazette contributed to the education of the less-educated in 
the country.
The appearance of Vaqaye‘-e Ettefaqiyeh, as the only public form of print media in the 
middle of the nineteenth century, was particularly significant, because it contributed to the 
popularisation of reading and the education of Iranians about domestic and foreign affairs. 
Iranians who read a copy of the gazette or those who heard it read aloud in public spaces could 
envision themselves members of an imagined national community of Iranians. According to one 
estimate, 270 copies of the gazette were distributed in Tehran, and 166 copies were distributed in 
Azerbaijan.25 Furthermore, over its one decade of publication, it was delivered to and read in 
small cities, villages, and even among the migrating tribespeople.26 Thus, the gazette reached a 
considerable part of the extant reading public in Iran. Despite its high price, which made some 
Iranians loathe to buy it, the gazette attracted a larger audience only after seven weeks of 
 
22 Altick 1998: 5.
23 In the wake of the cultural and administrative reforms of early nineteenth century, Iran witnessed the 
establishment of several schools and printing houses that would increase the rate of literacy in Iran and lead to the 
growth of book and journal readers in the next decades. While there were some translations and publications by 
instructors of Dar al-Fonun in this period, they were only available to the elite who could attend the school. Thus, 
Vaghayeh-e Ettefaghiyeh educated those who could not attend Dar al-Fonun, those who lived in small cities and 
villages, and those who could not afford to buy the gazette, about contemporary developments in Iran and the 
outside world. For a detailed discussion of educational and cultural reforms in nineteenth century Iran see Ringer 
2001.
24 Rajaei 2000: 81. 
25 Sadr Hashemi 1984: 5.
26 Adamiyat 1984: 377.
7
publication. Each issue was ten shahi, and its annual subscription fee was twenty-four qeran. 
According to one calculation, each issue’s price was equal to that of one and half kilograms of 
meat in Iran.27
Since the price was high for contemporary Iranians, in the beginning of its publication the 
gazette did not have many subscribers besides the officials who were mandated to purchase it.28
However, as more people became aware of its importance, the demand for it increased, a fact 
that is reflected on the front page of its seventh issue,
In the beginning of the work of this ruznameh, some of the people of this government, 
because they did not appreciate the advantages of the ruznameh and it was not part of their 
common routine, did not want it. After some weeks of its work, in addition to the elites of 
the exalted government, the military officials, and the provincial governors, who were 
ordered by the exalted government to buy it, many people have registered their names with 
alacrity and enthusiasm to receive this ruznameh every week.29
Thus, it can be assumed that after this increase in demand for the gazette, between 500 to 700 
copies of it were printed and distributed weekly.30 The gazette’s wide distribution was made 
particularly possible because of the recently established postal system or “chapar” in Iran, which 
made the delivery of the gazette to even remote provinces manageable.31 In this light, a modern 
development, i. e. the post system worked in tandem with another modern development, i. e. the 
gazette to educate Iranians about domestic and foreign news and popularise reading among them. 
Another indication of the gazette’s popularity with a wide audience is its regular printing of 
advertisements. The gazette regularly announced prices of different merchandise in different 
provinces for their general audience32 as well as the times of sunrise and sunset during Ramadan 
 
27 Rezvani 1995: vii.
28
 Any of the government officials whose income was about two hundred toman had to pay two toman and four 
thousand dinar for the annual subscription. The gazette was sent to provinces every Friday with the post system 
“chapar.” Kianfar 2009: 278.
29 Ruznameh-ye Vaqaye‘-e Ettefaqiyeh, 20 March1851: 1.
30 Since 270 copies were distributed among courtiers in Tehran and 166 copies were distributed among courtiers in 
Azerbaijan, the gazette ahd 436 courtly subscribers. If, as evidenced by the announcement on March 20, 1851, noncourtiers also bought it, it would be not unlikely to assume that the gazette had between 500 to 700 buyers weekly 
and was published in those numbers.
31 One reasons for its regular publication every week for ten years can be explained through the ease of delivery 
provided by the postal service. Lorentz 1974: 208.
32 In many issues, the gazette published long lists of prices of different merchandise, such as bread, meat, 
watermelon, sugar, and saffron in different cities. For instance, the gazette offers a detailed list of the prices of 
different merchandise in Tehran 31 August 1853: 5; 16 February 1854: 3; and 20 April 1854: 5-6; in Qazvin 12 
October 1854: 4; in Mazandaran 16 March 1855: 4; in Borujerd 10 May 1855, 4; in Astarabad 13 July 1855: 4; in 
Kerman 16 August 1855: 6; in Yazd 30 August 1855: 6; in Isfahan 1 May 1856: 5; and in Khurasan 10 July 1856: 5. 
8
for their Muslim audience.33 In this light, the producers of the gazette knew that it was not only 
consumed by the Qajar officials, who were required to subscribe to it,34 but also by a larger 
audience among the uneducated and less-educated masses. 
Those Iranians who were literate and bought the gazette, read it aloud in public places to 
those who could not buy it or were illiterate. In this manner, the gazette garnered an audience 
among the illiterate Iranians as well. According to Monica M. Ringer, the gazette was read aloud 
in public places to both the illiterate as well as those who could not buy it.35 In this regard, Shiva 
Balaghi also maintains that the practice of reciting epic and lyrical poetry in teahouses and in 
public gatherings, which had existed in Iran for centuries, was adapted to reading aloud the 
official gazette for the Iranian public as well.36 Interestingly, the gazette became popular among 
Iranians living abroad as well. According to the “Announcements” section of the gazette on 
April 8, 1852, “In some cities of Farangestan and the North New World, they have asked for one 
complete volume of the gazette from number one to number fifty-two.”37 Although it does not 
specify who comprise “they,” the announcement demonstrates that the gazette had gained 
popularity among the Iranians living abroad too. In sum, over its one decade of publication, the 
gazette garnered a considerable audience in Iran and was key in popularizing newspaper reading 
in Iran.
Discussing the rise of the print media in Europe since the Medieval ages and their social 
impact on the way Europeans conceptualise their relation to their larger national communities, 
Marshall McLuhan holds, “Print released great psychic and social energies in the Renaissance, as 
today in Japan or Russia, by breaking the individual out of the traditional group while providing 
a model of how to add individual to individual in massive agglomeration of power.” 38 In other 
words, the proliferation of print media, such as books and periodicals, contributed to the rise of a 
new group solidarity and social union in different countries; furthermore, it caused the 
individuals to develop a sense of belonging to a larger community. Similarly, Anderson proposes 
that there is a connection between the proliferation of the print media and the creation of social 
and national community. Anderson proposes that the production of the print media, particularly 
the novel and the newspaper, was instrumental in molding new forms of national soldiarity in 
Europe. In his view, the novel and the newspaper provided “the technical means for ‘representing’ the kind of imagined community that is the nation” in the eighteenth-century 
 
33 For instance, it includes a list of the time of the morning prayer, evening prayer, sunrise, and sunset of all days of 
Ramadan issue 1 May 1856: 3: and 2 April 1857: 3. 
34 The practice of compelling the Qajar officials to subscribe to the official gazette continued to the end of the 
nineteenth century. Nabavi 2009. 
35 Ringer 2001: 69.
36 Balaghi 2001: 169.
37 Ruznameh-ye Vaqaye‘-e Ettefaqiyeh, 8 April 1852: 8.
38 McLuhen 1994: 172. 
9
Europe.39 Taking a cue from McLuhan and Anderson, we can argue that the regular and 
uninterrupted publication and circulation of Vaqaye‘-e Ettefaqiyeh for ten years presented to the 
Iranians the idea that they belonged to a larger national community. Drawing upon views of 
McLuhan and Anderson, it can also be contended that the publication of Vaqaye‘-e Ettefaqiyeh, 
as the only available form of print media to the Iranian public between 1851 and 1861, was 
crucial in the creation of a new understanding of social and national community in Iran.
40 Before 
the emergence of other forms of popular print media, such as books and other journals, which 
occurred with the establishment the Ministry of Publications in 1883,41 the government gazette 
was the most influential medium for forming a new sense of communal and national belonging 
among Iranians.
The Role of Vaqaye‘-e Ettefaqiyeh in the Publicisation of Politics and the Popularisation of 
Reading in Iran
The publication of the official gazette between 1851 and 1861 was an important historical 
phenomenon. The gazette was the main medium for the popualrisasation of reading, the 
publicisation of the politics of court, albeit limitedly, and the education of Iranians about 
domestic and foreign news and developments.42 Vaqaye‘-e Ettefaqiyeh was published weekly by 
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in Tehran and distributed to different cities and towns. A usual 
issue of the gazette was divided into two sections, one for domestic news and the other for 
foreign news. In the domestic news section, the gazette printed official decrees, reports of the 
proceedings of the Tehran court and provincial capitals, the current condition of the Iranian 
armies, the monarch’s decisions regarding domestic and foreign policy, his frequent travels 
inside Iran, and his appointments of new officials to different provinces. The foreign news 
section contained reports of modern inventions and discoveries, major historical developments, 
as well as modern and liberal institutions outside Iran.
A usual domestic news section of Vaqaye‘-e Ettefaqiyeh was divided into “News of the 
Capital” (Akhbar-e Khod-e Dar al-Khelafeh), which often included two subsections on “The 
 
39 Anderson 2006: 25.
40 Such a view is reflected by Hamid Dabashi, although he only briefly mentions the official gazette and defines it as 
a reformist newspaper. Dabashi considers the gazette “a national newspaper that brought the emerging nation 
together around daily news from various provinces, as well as from other parts of the world, and Europe in 
particular.” Dabashi 2016: 44.
41 It included four main branches, the bureau royal translations, the bureau of newspapers, the government 
publishing bureau, and the center for publishing an encyclopedia of the Nasiri era. Azarang 2015: 265.
42 “The title of Ruznameh-ye Vaqaye‘-e Ettefaqiyeh was changed to Ruznameh-ye Dowlat-e Elliyieh-ye Iran and 
Ruznameh-ye Dowlati between 1861 and 1872. From 1872 until 1911, its titled was changed to Iran, and then 
Ruznameh-ye Rasmi-ye Dowlat-e Iran.” Tarbiyat and Browne 1914: 11-12.
10
Royal Entourage” (Ordu-ye Homayuni) about the monarch’s travels inside the country, and “The 
Military Affairs,” (Omurat-e Ghoshuni) about the conditions of troops of different cities. The 
domestic news section usually offered news of the peace and security of the protected realms of 
Iran, the latest advances in Iranian military technology, economic progress, and the new court 
and official appointments.43 In this way, it functioned as the government bulletin. It also 
regularly included another subsection, titled, “News of Other Lands of Iran” (Akhbar-e Sayer-e 
Mamalik-e Iran), which was divided by the names of different provinces, such as Mazandaran, 
Khurasan, Kermanshahan, Esfahan, Fars, Kashan, and Gilan, and reported news of each 
province. For instance, the issue No. 265, published on February 28, 1856, reports “Last year, the 
people of Gilan rebelled in Gilan because of their hatred of the behavior of their governor,” and 
“these days, some of the elders as well as the ulema of Gilan have come to His Majesty’s 
presence and have offered their grievances about the mentioned governor; they have claimed that 
in the past seven years, he has extorted and suppressed people in different ways.” Therefore, “the 
people cannot countenance paying taxes or even living in that land.”44 It announces that after 
thorough investigations by the Tehran court, it was revealed that “the people [of Gilan] were 
right.”45 Then, it announces that the monarch has ordered the governor of Gilan to repay all the 
unfair expenses and fines he has unfairly collected from people. Regardless of its accuracy and 
the possibility that it might only represent the Tehran court’s interpretation of the incident, such 
an announcement in the official gazette shows that five years into its publication, the gazette’s 
writers and editors envisioned an imagined national community as their audience. They 
announced news of Gilan and the Tehran court’s reaction to it for all their readers, whom they 
knew would read the gazette in different provinces; thus, they had a national audience of the 
officials and non-officials in mind. 
The gazette’s publication of the procedures of the court was unprecedented in Iran. Whereas 
in earlier decades, the official decrees and decisions about the government were only circulated 
among the courtiers through official correspondence, Vaqaye‘-e Ettefaqiyeh made a broader 
national audience aware of the previously exclusive politics of the Qajar court. Thus, through its 
domestic news section the gazette on the one hand, informed a national public about the
proceedings of the government and infused in them a sense of belonging to a national 
community, and on the other hand, it demonstrated to its readers the growing power of the Qajar 
state administration. Its informative mission is declared on the front page of its first issue, 
published on February 7, 1851,
Because the intention of the sacred royal highness is set upon educating the inhabitants of 
Iran and informing them about domestic affairs and foreign news, it has been decided that 
the royal decrees and internal news, which are called in other governments with the name, 
 
43 Ansari 2001: 15.
44 Ruznameh-ye Vaqaye‘-e Ettefaqiyeh, 28 February 1856: 3-4.
45 Ruznameh-ye Vaqaye‘-e Ettefaqiyeh, 28 February 1856: 5.
11
gazet, be published in the government publishing bureau and distributed in all cities of 
Iran.46
In this light, from the beginning, the gazette was intended as a medium to educate its audience 
about the domestic and foreign affairs. It educated its audience on two levels of communication. 
On the vertical level, it communicated the proceedings of the capital and provincial governments 
as well as the news of contemporary developments inside and outside Iran to its national 
audience. And on the horizontal level, it announced the official news and decrees of the capital 
and provincial centers to the government officials in different provinces. At this level, it 
functioned as an official bulletin for the court. Although the news of the foreign world was 
interesting for and could have been read by the officials in the capital and different provinces, the 
decrees and decisions of the court were particularly targeted at them. Scholars of Iranian history 
who consider Vaqaye‘-e Ettefaqiyeh as a bulletin of the court focus their research perspective to 
this horizontal level of communication. However, a comprehensive study of Vaqaye‘-e
Ettefaqiyeh must take into consideration its communicative capabilities on both horizontal and 
vertical levels. 
The gazette shows its intention for both horizontal and vertical communication in an 
announcement on November 21, 1851. It declares because His Majesty has intended to “educate, 
enlighten, and inform the common people of this exalted government (‘omum-e khalgh-e in 
dowlat-e ‘elliyeh)” about “the government pronouncements as well as domestic and foreign 
news,” he has officially ordered that “the trusted, the nobles, and the members of the 
government; the courtiers; the governors, the advisers, and the local rulers; the merchants, the 
notables, and the eminent of provinces; the khans and tribal chieftains; and those with official 
titles” must buy the newspaper.47 The same issue moreover demonstrates the gazette’s goal of 
vertical communication and education as it announces that His Highness has ordered the gazette 
be delivered to “whoever among other [non-government] people that is interested in it (sayer-e 
mardom har kodam keh khodeshan taleb bashand).”48 Thus, the gazette was intended to 
communicate both horizontally and vertically with its readers. 
Furthermore, its producers envisaged a national audience for the gazette. For example, when 
in 1858, Naser al-Din Shah decided to establish six ministries and divide the court’s political 
power, his decision was published in Vaqaye‘-e Ettefaqiyeh for the attention of all Iranians. On 
September 3, 1858, the gazette announces that the monarch has recognised the challenges of 
delegating “all important affairs” to one person and has decided to divide the power among six 
independent ministries of the Interior (Vezarat-e Dakheleh), War (Jang), Foreign Affairs 
(‘Omur-e Kharejeh), Pensions (Maliyeh), Justice (‘Adliyeh), Duties and Endowments (Vazayef 
 
46 Ruznameh-ye Vaqaye‘-e Ettefaqiyeh, 7 February 1851: 1.
47 Ruznameh-ye Vaqaye‘-e Ettefaqiyeh, 21 November 1851: 2.
48 Ruznameh-ye Vaqaye‘-e Ettefaqiyeh, 21 November 1851: 2.
12
va Oqaf),49 and describes the duties and responsibilities of the ministers.50 In sum, the domestic 
news section of the official gazette was an important medium for informing Iranians about 
previously exclusive proceedings of the court, popularise journal reading in Iran, and inculcate in 
its audience, both those who read it and those who heard it read aloud in public spaces, a sense of 
belonging to a national community. 
Vaqaye‘-e Ettefaqiyeh’s Representation of Historical Developments outside Iran
In addition to popularising reading and publicising news of the court in its domestic news 
section, Vaqaye‘-e Ettefaqiyeh exposed its readers to the contemporary historical developments 
outside Iran. In particular, it offered accounts of modern technological, industrial, and scientific 
advances as well as liberal democratic modes of governance outside Iran in its foreign news 
section. Through close readings of the foreign news section of Vaqaye‘-e Ettefaqiyeh, this part of 
the present article shows that the gazette was an important source for educating Iranians about 
modern historical developments outside Iran, particularly in Europe and the New World.
The foreign news section, “News of Foreign Countries” (Akhbar-e Dowal-e Kharejeh), 
usually occupied one to four pages of the gazette. It was divided into subsections with the names 
of different countries, which were considered important to the Iranian government and for the 
Iranian people at the time. Among the countries, whose news were often published in the gazette 
France, England, Russia, the Ottoman Empire, as well as the New World stand out. Nonetheless, 
European countries and the North New World received the most attention in the foreign news 
section.51 Such concentration on the news of Europe, especially of England52 and France,53 as 
well as the New World shows that for the reporters and writers of the gazette, the Qajar Foreign 
Ministry, and the Qajar court, Europe and the New World were politically significant. 
Simultaneous with the Qajar court’s attempt to establish favorable diplomatic relations with 
England and France, the official gazette mostly covered news of these two European countries. 
Moreover, since recent developments in the New World and the transatlantic migrations were 
among the most important contemporary developments in the world and constantly covered in 
the European press, the contributors of the gazette regularly reported about them.
 
49 Ruznameh-ye Vaqaye‘-e Ettefaqiyeh, 3 September 1858: 1.
50 However, reflecting the autocratic tendencies of the monarch, the gazette announced that Naser al-Din Shah has 
considered it necessary that all the ministries must answer to him and do not enforce laws without his approval. 
Ruznameh-ye Vaqaye‘-e Ettefaqiyeh, 3 September 1858: 2-3.
51 The section began by subsections on England, France, other European countries, and the New World in order. 
Then, it reported on recent events in the Ottoman Empire.
52 For accounts of the diplomatic and political relations between the Great Britain and Iran look at Martin 2009; 
Greaves, 1991; and Wright 1997.
53 For a summary of the Franco-Persian relations in the nineteenth century see: Hellot-Bellier 2012; and Amini 1999.
13
This part of the present article addresses some examples of the modern discoveries and 
inventions, as well as liberal democratic institutions described in the Qajar gazette in order to 
show how the gazette exposed its audience to important historical developments outside Iran. 
Among the most significant topics covered in the foreign news section of the official gazette 
were reports of contemporary scientific, industrial, and political developments of Europe and the 
New World. According to one recent estimate, 81 out of 471 issues of the gazette dedicated 20 
percent of their pages to modern social, political, cultural, technological, and scientific 
developments outside Iran,54 an estimate that points to the importance of material and intellectual 
manifestations of European modernity for the producers of the gazette. Through the official 
gazette, for the first time, a national Iranian public was exposed to modern developments outside 
Iran and as such, studying the kind of information contained in the gazette sheds light on an 
important early phase of Iran’s encounter with modernity. The following section offers a 
selection of the modern technological and liberal developments reported in the Qajar gazette 
between 1851 and 1861.
Accounts of the Discovery of the New World
Reflecting the importance of travels of discovery and exploration for Farangistan, the gazette 
declares on January 14, 1857, “In the governments of Farangestan they have an established and 
old law to send travelers and agents to discover different lands and climes of the world and to 
learn about the conditions of far and strange countries. Its benefits and advantages have been 
proved many times.”55 Thus, it underlines the importance of the many travels of discovery in the 
world and points toward the reason why it included for the benefit of its audience many reports 
of travels of discovery and exploration. Among such travels the discovery of the New World by 
Europeans appeared quite often. Iranians who were stationed in Europe and provided for the 
gazette summaries of news in their country of service as well as the translators of the gazette in 
Tehran could not resist reporting on a prominent development in Farangistan; thus, they often 
included reports of the recent transatlantic travels.
For instance, on February 28, 1851, the gazette offers the following account of the discovery of 
the New World by Europeans,
Because the people of Farangestan, who have traveled to the New World, do not know 
sufficiently about its history, a lot of discussion and debate have occurred among the 
scholars of Farangestan about the origins of the first people who civilised those lands [the 
New World]. Based on their scripts and other sources, which a French scholar has brought 
 
54 Forqani and Hamzei 2013: 171.
55 Ruznameh-ye Vaqaye‘-e Ettefaqiyeh, 14 January 1857: 6.
14
back from the New World, it has been revealed and proved that some of the countries of the 
South New World are very ancient and civilised. In fact, at the time of the Egyptian 
Pharaohs, there was civilisation in those lands. And, based on the ancient ruins seen there, it 
was determined that some of their ancient inhabitants have had powerful governments, 
which were superior to the rest of the world in certain industries.56
In this manner, the gazette reports not only on the history of civilisation in the New World, but 
also discusses the contemporary interest of Europeans in discovering more about the histories 
and civilisations of the New World. It also shows how the discipline of history is important for 
Europeans. In particular, it demonstrates to its Iranian audience that by studying the scripts and 
books of the New World, Europeans have learned about the history of the peoples of the New 
World. The gazette’s presentation of such information is significant because at the time of its 
publication, the Iranian audience of the gazette had limited access to histories of Europe and the 
New World.57 In another noteworthy instance, the gazette talks about Europeans’ recent 
migration to the New World. On March 11, 1852, it announces,
Every year the people of Farangestan leave their own lands and migrate to the lands of the 
North New World. In particular, the numbers of the people of England and Austria, who 
have gone to the city of New York in the North New World, are the following: one hundred 
and sixty-three thousand and two hundred and fifty-six people from the island of Ireland, 
which is part of the lands of England; twenty-eight thousand and five hundred and fiftythree people from England itself; and sixty-nine thousand and eight hundred and eightythree people from the lands of Austria have gone there. 58
In this case, the gazette informs its audience about the migration of people of Farangestan to the 
New World. Moreover, by providing the numbers of the people migrating to the New World, it 
offers a concrete estimation of the scale and extent of contemporary transatlantic migrations in a 
period that Iran still did not have reliable and comfortable roads. The writers and editors of the 
gazette continued this mode of recounting news of the transatlantic travels until the end of its 
publication in 1861. For example, on issue No. 267, published on March 13, 1856, the gazette 
announces, “in the Christian year of 1855, one hundred twenty-three trading steamships have 
drowned and broken at sea. Among these, fifty-five ships were from the New World, forty-two 
from England, eleven from France, and thirteen from other countries.”59 In this instance, the 
 
56 Ruznameh-ye Vaqaye‘-e Ettefaqiyeh, 28 February 1851: 5.
57 According to ‘Abd al-Hossein Azarang in this period only few histories of European monarchs were translated 
into Persian and they were mostly kept in the royal libraries of Tehran and Tabriz for the consideration of the Shah 
and the Crown Prince. Azarang 2015: 228-229.
58 Ruznameh-ye Vaqaye‘-e Ettefaqiyeh, 11 March 1852: 4.
59 Ruznameh-ye Vaqaye‘-e Ettefaqiyeh, 13 March 1856: 8.
15
gazette introduces its audience to contemporary trades between Europe and the New World and 
the importance of steamships in such trades. In another instance, the gazette writes about the 
relations between Canada, as part of the North New World, and England. On August 28, 1856, 
under the “England” subsection, it reports,
As they have written in the report from England, people from the country of Kanada, which 
is located on the Northern New World and is under control of England, have written to the 
king of England to send thanks for the general peace and the dismissal of soldiers to their 
own homelands and lands. They have requested the king of England to visit their land, and 
they have prepared themselves to receive him according to their established rules of honor 
and respect.60
In this way, it not only introduces the country of Canada, but also reports on the relations 
between England and Canada. In line with the Qajar courtiers’ attention to England as a 
contemporary superpower, it is plausible that it introduces Canada as a country that relies on 
England. The gazette does not pay attention to or comment on the colonial activities of England 
in the New World; nonetheless, by reporting on Canada, it exposes its Iranian readers to one of 
the major historical developments outside Iran. 
New Inventions and Discoveries of Farangistan and the New World
The gazette also often included reports about recent technological and scientific 
developments and inventions in Europe and the New World. For instance, on June 10, 1852, the 
gazette reports, 
Somebody in the North New World has invented a new model of gun. Although most of the 
guns they invent are not useful, but because they would provide models to examine and will 
cause progress of people of industry, it is better to write about them in the gazette. He has 
made the gun in such a way that he shoots twenty-five bullets from it without the need to 
reload twenty-five bullets with gunpowder. Each bullet is put at the end of the gun’s stock, 
which looks like a cylinder. When one bullet is shot, another replaces it with gunpowder and 
the detonator. The person, who has invented this gun, comfortably shoots twenty-five bullets 
in one minute and a hundred twenty-five bullets in five minutes. Some of the officials of the 
 
60 Ruznameh-ye Vaqaye‘-e Ettefaqiyeh, 28 August 1856: 7.
16
New World have seen this gun and have planned to examine it to see whether it is useful for 
their armies.61
Most probably, the gazette is describing the new Smith and Wesson gun, which according to the 
website of Smith and Wesson, was its latest model in 1852 and could fire a fully self-contained 
cartridge. Regardless of which exact weapon the gazette is describing, its description is 
significant for 1852, when the Iranian court was avidly trying to learn how to import and make 
advanced European weapons. Although some of the court officials might have known about the
inventions of new weapons abroad, the Iranian public did not have access to such knowledge. In 
another instance, the gazette includes a report of the construction of a recent transatlantic liner 
named “Persia.” On April 13, 1857, it reports,
As they have written in the reports from the foreign countries, one of the merchants of a 
company has constructed a steamship and has named it Pershiya, which means Iran. The 
length of the ship is one hundred and twenty zar‘
62 of Iran, its width is fourteen zar‘, and its 
depth is twenty-two zar‘. The diameter of its wheels that revolve and move the ship are 
thirteen zar‘ and its steam power is more than the power of four thousand horses. They have 
built in it two hundred and sixty rooms for the residence of the travelers and passengers. 
They have assigned one hundred and fifty sailors and workers for it. It is the biggest trade 
ship that the mentioned company has constructed for traveling between England and the 
New World.63
Thus, the gazette describes the British liner, Persia which commenced service with the Cunard 
Line on 26, January 1856. It was one of the largest ocean liners in the world, one that The 
Illustrated London News on February 9, 1856, introduced as “a leviathan vessel.”64 The writers 
and editors of the gazette knew that many Iranians could not afford to travel to Europe or from 
Europe to the New World, and did not have any familiarity with new steamships, thus, they 
included such information to educate their Iranian audience about modern scientific and 
technological developments. The gazette also reported about the construction of new warships 
for the British Navy. For example, on January 12, 1854, under the subsection for “England” in 
the foreign news section, it writes, 
 
61 Ruznameh-ye Vaqaye‘-e Ettefaqiyeh, 10 June 1852: 5.
62 Each zar‘ is equal to 1.04 meters.
63 Ruznameh-ye Vaqaye‘-e Ettefaqiyeh, 13 April 1867: 5. 
64 The Illustrated London News, 9 February 1856: 153.
17
They have written in one of the newspapers of this land that they have recently constructed 
thirty-one new ships, which they have not put in the sea yet. And they have written the 
details of the ships in the following manner: ships with one hundred and twenty cannons:
six; ships with one hundred and four cannons: three; ships with eighty-four cannons: two; 
ships with eighty cannons: two; ships with seventy-eight cannons: three; and ships with 
seventy-two cannons: fifteen, which in total is thirty-one ships and they have one thousand 
and six hundred and seventy-four cannons.65
In this case, the gazette describes the group of ships that the British Navy had recently renovated 
or constructed. For instance, the Royal George was renovated into a 120-gun steam liner in 
1853,
66 and the gazette was recounting such renovations. For an Iranian audience whose country 
did not have a powerful or modern naval force such information must have been very interesting 
and informative. In another issue, the gazette offers a report about new inventions in the mast 
construction of English ships. On September 24, 1856, the gazette writes,
Among the English artisans, who make inventions in industries and get rewarded, somebody 
has invented a new ship these days. It opens and closes like an umbrella and it has been 
enlarged as much as possible to have sitting places, which do not take much space, for 
people; and it is among strange inventions (“ekhtera‘at-e qaribeh.”)67
Thus, the gazette informs its audience about new inventions in mast making in England. There 
are many inventors, who are famed for new designs for masts in 1856; therefore, it is difficult to 
identify the person Vaqaye‘-e Ettefaqiyeh is talking about. Nonetheless, the inventor could be 
one Samuel Palmer Gladstone, who received the patent for “Improvements in the construction of 
masts and yards” on January 29, 1856.68 In addition to inventions in gun making and ship 
making, the gazette also reports on agricultural advances in Farangestan,
In some places of Farangestan, especially in Austria, England, and France, they have 
progressed a lot in the science of farming (dar ‘elm-e zera‘at taraqqi kardeh and) and they 
publish a lot in their ruznameh. For example, they have written these days that a piece of 
land that used to yield only twelve kharvar [3600 kilograms] of wheat, now yields forty-five 
 
65 Ruznameh-ye Vaqaye‘-e Ettefaqiyeh, 12 January 1854: 4.
66 Grove 2005: 28.
67 Ruznameh-ye Vaqaye‘-e Ettefaqiyeh, 24 September 1856: 7.
68 Woodcroft 1857: 17.
18
kharvar [13500 kilograms]. And other products that they plant there have increased 
likewise.69
In this way, the gazette tells its audience about the benefits of the science of farming or 
agriculture and how it has increased European products and has caused them progress. In sum, 
the foreign news section of the Qajar gazette was an important and the only public medium for 
informing Iranians about modern inventions and discoveries.
Reports of Democratic Developments and Institutions outside Iran
In addition to the news of contemporary technological, commercial, and scientific 
developments in Europe and the New World, the Qajar gazette also wrote about the liberal and 
democratic institutions outside Iran. Because a considerable part of the foreign news was sent to 
Iran by Iranian representatives in Europe and the New World, it is possible that some of these 
representatives, who had lived with and saw the importance of liberal developments, 
intentionally selected news of foreign parliaments and councils for the consideration of the 
audience of Vaqaye‘-e Ettefaqiyeh.
Among the most notable reports of the gazette are those about the English Parliament. For 
instance, on September 30, 1858, the gazette explains to its readers the importance of the English 
Parliament, the House of Lords, and the House of Commons, and how their members are 
selected,
The council of the English parliament is opened every year in the beginning of spring. It 
continues for a few months and after that, it closes. The members of the council are divided 
into two groups, or two separate assemblies. One, the assembly of the national 
representatives (“majles-e vokala-ye mellati”) and the other, the assembly of the government 
elites (“majles-e khavanin-e dowlati”). The members of the national assembly are selected 
by the nation (“mellat”) and the members of the government assembly are selected by the 
king. All the laws and rules (“ghavanin va nezamat”) and all other important affairs [of the 
state] are first debated and discussed in the assembly appointed by the nation, and if they are 
passed with the majority of opinions (“aksariyat-e ara”), then those affairs are referred to 
the assembly of the government elites, and they are debated and studied there three times as 
 
69 Ruznameh-ye Vaqaye‘-e Ettefaqiyeh, 1 December 1853: 7.
19
well. If the majority [of opinions] is gained there too, then, they [laws and regulations] are 
executed and upheld.70
Such description of the English Parliament in 1858 is significant because on the one hand, it 
shows that in the circle publishing the official Qajar gazette there were reformist and liberal 
minded members, who wanted to inform their Iranian readers about the democratic nature of the 
English government; and on the other hand, it underlines the importance of the decision of the 
people in the governance of a powerful European country for the Iranian audience of the gazette. 
It is also noteworthy because it was published by the Qajar official gazette only a decade into the 
half-century reign of Naser al-Din Shah as the absolute monarch of Iran. 
In another example, on June 10, 1852, the gazette describes a party by the mayor of London, 
where the Prime Minister, John Russell (1792-1878) and other ministers of England tell their 
European and American counterparts about the importance of the will of the people in the 
government of England,
They talked about the fact that the [English] king has ordered representatives be selected 
from every city and every village. They said that when the representatives convene to 
counsel, it becomes decided whether or not the way we rule the country agrees with the 
opinion of the public (“ra‘-ye khalq”) and the benefit of the country (“salah-e velayat”). 
And we do all our best to carry out this responsibility that the king has assigned for us.71
In this way, by highlighting the importance of the opinion of the public for the benefit of 
England, the gazette shows how the will of the people is important for the English ministers and 
king. Furthermore, without denying the role of the king in a democratic government, the gazette 
informs its readers that great countries of Europe have realised the importance of “the opinion of 
the public” in ruling the country. 
In another noteworthy example, the gazette describes the process of passing decisions into 
law in England. Under the section for “England” in the foreign news section on June 15, 1853, it 
writes, “According to the law of that land whatever passes in the council house of representatives 
of the people must go to the council house of lords afterward. And after that, they must be 
viewed by the king, so that he would endorse it and make it into an official decree.”72 Thus, the 
gazette talks about the role of the representatives of the English people, and by extension, the 
English people, in making decisions about their country’s affairs. Interestingly, it presents the 
English king as the final arbiter of laws in England, a gesture that indicates the contributors of 
 
70 Ruznameh-ye Vaqaye‘-e Ettefaqiyeh, 30 September 1858: 6. 
71 Ruznameh-ye Vaqaye‘-e Ettefaqiyeh, 10 June 1852: 5. 
72 Ruznameh-ye Vaqaye‘-e Ettefaqiyeh, 15 June 1853: 5.
20
the gazette were aware of the nature of the government in Iran and did not intend to offend Naser 
al-Din Shah by their description of the mode of governance in England.
The gazette not only described the English parliament, but also regularly included reports 
about different measures and decisions of the English parliament. For instance, on September 22, 
1853, it writes, “The council house (“mashverat khaneh”) of England has convened to discuss 
trade with India.”73 Significantly, the official gazette thus informs his readers that the English 
parliament and the representatives of the people have a say in decisions regarding national trade. 
In another issue, on September 29, 1853, it declares, “In the council house of England, they have 
discussed the expenses for land and sea armies.”74 Then, it briefly describes opposing views in 
the English parliament about the expenses of the English armies. In this case, it informs its 
audience that the English parliament and the representatives of the people influence decisions 
regarding the nation’s armies in 1853, simultaneous with Naser al-Din Shah’s reign over Iranian 
armies as the absolute monarch.75 In another notable example, on July 1, 1858, the gazette 
reports,
These days, the government of England has decided and attempted to increase its naval 
power (“ghovveh-ye bahriyeh”) and to build and maintain more warships. Because based on 
the law of that government, the government must seek the opinion of the nation (“mellat”) 
about its affairs, people have the right to talk about and discuss it. Therefore, representatives 
of different guilds (“asnaf”) and representatives of the people have come to the council 
house to discuss it.76
Thus, in 1858, the gazette talks about the English law that allows the English people to 
contribute to the decisions about their national affairs, such as the expenditure on the English 
naval forces. It also informs its Iranian readers about the importance of the English law and the 
necessity to respect it among the English government officials. 
In addition to the democratic institutions of England, the gazette regularly wrote about 
democratic developments in contemporary France, another contemporary European country in 
which the Iranian court was interested. For instance, on February 20, 1852, under the “France” 
subsection of the foreign news section, the gazette writes about the French voting for Napoleon 
III (1808-1873),
 
73 Ruznameh-ye Vaqaye‘-e Ettefaqiyeh, 22 September 1853: 8. 
74 Ruznameh-ye Vaqaye‘-e Ettefaqiyeh, 29 September 1853: 6. 
75 For an extended analysis of Naser al-Din Shah’s personal and political decisions during his long reign see Amanat 
1997.
76 Ruznameh-ye Vaqaye‘-e Ettefaqiyeh, 1 July 1858: 6.
21
Luyi Napiliyan, the head of the Government of France, has referred the proceeding of that 
government to the people (“khalq”) to decide what is the opinion of the people (“ra‘-ye 
khalq”) about running the government (“dowlat rani”). They have asked because based on 
their policy and regulations, all people of France (“ru‘aya-ye Faranseh”) must have a say in 
this matter [of selecting the head of the government]. When they counted the numbers and 
opinions of these individuals, it was revealed that those who wanted Luyi Napilyian and 
were satisfied with his being the government head were more than seven million people and 
those who did not want him were not more than one million people. Based on that [the 
opinion of the people], Napoleon is now well established and independent in his position as 
the head of the government.77
The gazette is reporting on Louis Napoléon Bonaparte’s coup d’état on December 2, 1851, when 
dissolved the Legislative Assembly and ordered a new constitution, which restored universal 
suffrage. Soon afterward, a plebiscite approved the new constitution.78 Although the gazette does 
not offer any details about Loui Napoleon’s dissolving the assembly, it nonetheless underscores 
the importance of the will of the French people in selecting the highest position of power in 
France. Interestingly, it represents Napoleon III as the one who sanctions and supports this mode 
of democratic process. 
The gazette also reports on the second plebiscite, which confirmed Napoleon III as the 
emperor of France and resulted in the resolution of the Senate. On December 3, 1852, the Qajar 
gazette reports the plebiscite of November 1852, in the following way, “As they had written in 
the ruznameh of incidents on November, Luyi Napiliyan has established himself as the king of 
France and has chosen the title of emperor. They are preparing the requirements necessary for his 
kingship.”79 Although Napoleon III does not seem particularly democratically inclined for 
declaring himself an emperor and dissolving the Senate and the National Assembly in this 
period, nonetheless, the gazette portrays him as a ruler who heeds the views of his people even in 
establishing an empire. Because translations of the histories of contemporary European monarchs 
were popular among Iranian courtiers and monarchs throughout the nineteenth century,80 it is 
likely that the contributors of the gazette wanted to show emperor Napoleon III as a king who 
 
77 Ruznameh-ye Vaqaye‘-e Ettefaqiyeh, 20 February 1852: 4. 
78 Price 2001: 18-21.
79 Ruznameh-ye Vaqaye‘-e Ettefaqiyeh, 3 December 1852: 5.
80 In the first decades of the nineteenth century, under Abbas Mirza’s administration in Tabriz, histories of famous 
European historical figures, such as Peter the Great, Napoleon, Alexander the Great, and Charles XII were translated 
into Persian. Adamiyat 1992: 152: and Azarang 2015: 228-229.
22
considers the opinion of the people in his government decisions as an example for the Iranian 
courtiers.81
The gazette also portrays Napoleon III as a supporter of modern education and technological 
innovations. On October 12, 1859, it writes, “For the progress of technologies and industries and 
for the increase of new inventions, his highness, the emperor of France has assigned an amount 
to award and encourage students of sciences and industries every three years.”82 In this way, the 
writers of the gazette show to their readers, specifically the Qajar courtiers and Naser al-Din
Shah, how strong European monarchs, even as they sanction the will of the national public, 
support technological and industrial advances. 
In many issues the gazette also addresses the perspective of European people about their 
rights. In a noteworthy example, the gazette writes about the French people’s awareness of and 
attention to their rights as members of the national community. For example, on August 9, 1854, 
it recounts the following incident, 
In this land [France], the priests have announced their plan to mandate that nobody must 
work on Sundays because it is the praying day of the people of Christianity. All over the 
country, debates have risen. Most people do not like this [proposal], because they seek 
freedom (“taleb-e azadi budand”) and they say that the control (“ekhtiyar”) of the people 
should be in their own hands, and that the people must choose whether they would want to 
work or pray on Sundays.83
In this case, the gazette tells its Iranian audience about the importance of the people’s will in the 
affairs of an advanced European nation, such as France. In addition, it teaches the readers that 
the authority of the religious figures of Christianity can be challenged by the will of the French 
people. The idea that the people could stand up to the religious establishment was quite novel to 
the audience of Vaqaye‘-e Ettefaqiyeh. According to Said Amir Arjomand, the Qajar kings and 
the Shia establishment worked in tandem and gained legitimacy from one another. Naser al-Din 
Shah ruled as the guardian of the Shia Islam and during his long reign in the second half of the 
 
81 In particular, Naser al-Din Shah was interested in European strong men, and tried to emulate their sociopolitical 
measures. According to Amanat, “The biographies of Alexander of Macedonia, Peter I, Frederick the Great, 
Christopher Columbus, and Napoleon Bonaparte, together with numerous other volumes in history, travel, 
geography, and popular literature, were translated in the royal bureau, read by the shah, and shelved in the royal 
library.” Amanat 1997: 430.
82 Ruznameh-ye Vaqaye‘-e Ettefaqiyeh, 12 October 1859: 5.
83 Ruznameh-ye Vaqaye‘-e Ettefaqiyeh, 9 August 1854: 7. 
23
nineteenth century,84 the theory that the Qajar state and the Shia establishment constituted the 
main powers in the country and the idea of “the interdependence of kingship and religion” were 
popular with the Qajar court.85 Therefore, reporting an incident in which the people of a country 
stood up to their religious authorities and demanded a change in policy was quite unprecedented 
for the Iranian readers. 
In addition to England and France, the gazette paid attention to the democratic developments 
in the New World. For instance, on January 14, 1853, the gazette published the following news 
about the New World,
Because the specified period for assigning one of the members of the government for the 
position of President (“perezident”), who will be the chief of the Republic Government 
(“dowlat-e jomhuriyeh”) for four years, is approaching, the people [of the New World] will 
gather in different regions and they will try to make whomever they like the chief of 
government for this period. … The government officials of the North New World are 
judicious and sagacious; they know that power is in union. There is no other government on 
earth that has progressed like this [government] in such a short time.86
Therefore, at a time when a despotic Naser al-Din Shah was on the Iranian throne, the reformminded producers of the gazette exposed their readers to the ideas of Republicanism and 
representative government. They did not mention the name of Franklin Pierce (1804-1869), who 
was elected as the fourteenth United States president in 1853; nonetheless, they informed their 
readership that the astonishing progress of the North New World (“Yengi Donya-ye Shomali”) 
was due to its republic government and its people’s understanding that true power was in 
solidarity and the will of the people. In other words, they indirectly suggested to their audience 
that if Iran was to follow on the same path of progress as the United States, it had to respects and 
follow laws and the opinion of the people. The gazette on several other occasions described the 
democratic nature of the United States government. For instance, on May 8, 1856, it announced, 
“The head of the republic government (“dowlat-e jomhuriyeh”) of the New World is changed 
every four years. These days they have convened an assembly to choose the new head.”87 Thus, 
once again the gazette reminds its audience that the president of the North New World is elected 
and changed by the vote and will of the people every four years. The gazette moreover talks in 
 
84 According to Arjomand, during the first three decades of his rule between 1850s and 1880s Naser al-Din Shah 
was respectful of the Shia point of view and opinion regarding his rule and even his public appearances. Amir 
Arjomand 1984: 246.
85 Amir Arjomand 1988: 78.
86 Ruznameh-ye Vaqaye‘-e Ettefaqiyeh, 14 January 1853: 8. 
87 Ruznameh-ye Vaqaye‘-e Ettefaqiyeh, 8 May 1856: 7. 
24
detail about the Senate and the House of Representatives of the United States. On September 10, 
1856, it reports,
The united lands of the New World (“mamalek-e mojtama‘eh-ye Yengi Donya”) are, these 
days, composed of thirty-six republics (“jomhuriyeh”). These are each independent in 
decision makings and actions, besides the declaration of war and peace. To deal with 
domestic affairs and to counsel, they make a group of the members, and based on the 
majority of their votes, they select as president the side that most of the members of the 
council house prefer it. In the center of the lands that are governed by the mentioned chief 
and in the city of Washington (“vashangtun”) two council houses (“mashverat khaneh”) are 
held in the name of the lords (“khavanin”) and the representatives of the people (“vokala-ye 
ro‘aya”). The determined period for assigning government lords is six years and for 
assigning representatives of the people is two years. And the president, who is selected 
according to the views of these two assemblies (“majles”) of the lords of the government 
and the representatives of the people, is changed every four years. These days the current 
president of the New World’s period has concluded, and according to the votes of the 
majority of the council house, Monsieur Feromont has been selected as the president.88
Although the gazette’s information about the elections is not accurate, because John C. Frémont
(1813-1890) was not elected as the United States president in 1856 and he was only the 
Republican candidate, it is noteworthy, because it explains the working of the United States
Congress in only eight years into Naser al-Din Shah’s long reign. It also explains to its readers 
how members of the United States Senate and House of Representatives are selected, thus 
pointes to the importance of the will of the people in the government of the United States.
The gazette also regularly wrote about the role of the United States Congress in making 
decisions on behalf of the people. For instance, on September 10. 1857, it announces, “In these 
days, the annual taxes of the republic of the New World has a surplus of twenty-two million 
riyal, which is two and a half million of Iran’s currency. In the council house, they have 
discussed how this amount should be spent”89 Thus, it shows to its Iranian audience that 
decisions about allocation and distribution of the taxes of the New World are made by the 
council members and not one individual, as was the case in Iran, where Naser al-Din Shah had 
the final say in such decisions. Interestingly, the gazette even addresses the difference between 
the North and the South states in the North New World. On January 14, 1857, it reports,
 
88 Ruznameh-ye Vaqaye‘-e Ettefaqiyeh, 10 September 1856: 4.
89 Ruznameh-ye Vaqaye‘-e Ettefaqiyeh, 10 September 1857: 6.
25
The people of the southern side of the New World (“samt-e jonubi-ye yengi donya”) with the 
people of the northern side have differences about some issues, such as the fact that 
according to their old principles and laws in the south buying black servants and workers 
(“qolam va kaniz-e siyah”) and forcing them to work in the farm and other things are 
acceptable, and the north side considers this law unacceptable and false.90
In this way, the Qajar gazette talks about slavery and how Northern and Southern states of the 
United States had a conflict over this issue. In another notable example, it addresses the issue of 
slavery again. On February 2, 1854, it talks about the role of England in the abolition of slave 
trade across the Atlantic, “Based on the treaty that the government of England has signed with 
other Farangestan governments this year they have sent ships toward the West of the Kiniya
land in Africa in order to thwart trade of slaves and workers from there to the New World.”91
Thus, the gazette informs its audience about the recent attempt of European countries, in 
particular England, to stop the slave trade from Europe to the New World. Regardless of its 
accuracy, this report shows to the Iranian audience the power of European countries, especially 
England, in causing major changes in the world, such that the abolition of slavery. 
In conclusion, the gazette’s foreign news section informed its audience about both material 
and intellectual iterations of modernity. On the one hand, it reported on modern technological, 
scientific, and industrial inventions and advances outside Iran, and on the other hand, it talked 
about liberal modes of governance in foreign countries. 
The Importance of Modern Developments outside Iran for the Contemporary Iranians
As the Qajars were introduced to European modern technological and scientific 
developments through traveling to Europe in the first half of the nineteenth century, some of the 
courtiers, such as Amir Kabir, realised the importance of modern developments in the progress 
of European nations and by extension, in the possible progress of Iran. When Mirza Taqi Khan 
Farahani was young and had the title of Amir Nezam, he travelled to Russia as part of the retinue 
of Khosrow Mirza in 1829. The account of this travel, written by a court scribe by the name of 
Mirza Mostafa Afshar, demonstrates the extent to which some of the courtiers were aware of the 
importance of modern developments outside Iran in this period. Afshar details modern scientific, 
 
90 Ruznameh-ye Vaqaye‘-e Ettefaqiyeh, 14 January 1857: 5.
91 Ruznameh-ye Vaqaye‘-e Ettefaqiyeh, 2 February 1854: 7-8.
26
military, economic, and technological developments of Russia. In an interesting passage of the 
travel account, Afshar writes, “It is a pity that we see with our own eyes the progress and order 
(‘nazm wa taraqqi’) of our neighbor, which it has gained in a short time, and yet we do not think 
about having the same blessings for ourselves.”92 Amir Nizam, who later became Amir Kabir 
and ordered the establishment of Vaqaye‘-e Ettefaqiyeh, noticed modern developments in Russia 
during this trip and possibly read Afshar’s travelogue. There were also other travelogues of 
Europe in early nineteenth century that indicate the Iranian courtiers were aware of the 
significance of modern technological and scientific developments in Europe. For example, the 
travelogue of Mirza Saleh Shirazi explains at length different technological, military, and 
scientific developments in England.93 Written by one of the students who was sent to England to 
study modern languages and sciences in 1815, the travelogue of Mirza Saleh, like that of Afshar, 
was integral in introducing Iranians to modern developments in Europe and shows that Iranian 
courtiers were interested in and aware of such developments.
The belief in the importance of European technological and scientific advances in the 
progress of Iran is also expressed in Vaqaye‘-e Ettefaqiyeh. After describing the English and 
French naval forces and their economic and military benefits for England and France, on the 
April 22, 1857 issue, the gazette writes, “Countries of the ancient world (‘mamalek-e donya-ye 
‘atigh’) that are India, Iran, China, Japan, Thailand, and Korea, will find again their old fortune 
and prosperity with the seriousness and efforts of European sciences (‘‘ulum-e urupayiyeh’)”94
Thus, the contributors of the official gazette, similar to Iranian travelers to Europe, had realised 
the significance of modern European sciences and technologies. Whereas the travelogues of the 
Qajar courtiers were shared in manuscript format with other courtiers, the gazette addressed and 
reached a national audience. In this light, one of the most noteworthy functions of the official 
gazette was educating Iranians about contemporary modern developments in Europe and their 
importance in the progress of European countries. 
In sum, the foreign news section of Vaqaye‘-e Ettefaqiyeh introduced Iranians to 
contemporary historical developments outside Iran in a period that most Iranians did not know 
about the foreign world and the few educated courtiers had access merely to official chronicles 
and almanacs about the protected realms of Iran. According to the consensus among scholars of 
Iranian history, Iranians’ sustained and serious attention and exposure to world history occurred 
in the concluding decades of the nineteenth century. For instance, Fereydun Adamiyat argues 
that major changes in Iranians’ understanding of and approach to history occurred in the second 
half of the century.95 Abbas Amanat traces major transformations in Iranian historiography and 
 
92 Afshar 1970: 189.
93 Shirazi 1983.
94 Ruznameh-ye Vaqaye‘-e Ettefaqiyeh, 22 April 1857: 7. 
95 Adamiyat identifies the following sociocultural developments in the second half of the nineteenth century as main 
reasons for Iranians’ attention to world history and new historiography. First, Persian translations of histories of Iran 
by European authors, which, in this period were made available to a larger readership. Second, the historical 
textbooks and translations of European histories from English, French, and Russian produced by Dar al-Fonun’s 
27
Iranians’ understanding of history to late nineteenth century as well.96 Farzin Vejdani also traces 
changes in Iranian history writing and understanding of history to the latter part of the nineteenth 
century.97 In this light, the foreign news section of the official Qajar gazette provided 
unprecedented historical knowledge about contemporary developments in Europe and the New 
World to an audience that had limited or non-existent access to such knowledge. 
Conclusion
In the middle of the nineteenth century, Vaqaye‘-e Ettefaqiyeh, which was intended by the Qajar 
court to serve as its bulletin, was the most important popular literary and cultural development 
and the only form of print media that reached a broad section of Iranian society.
It was distributed weekly to different cities and towns, and through its physical presence and 
addressing a national audience was the main medium for creating a sense of national belonging 
among Iranians. the Iranians who read it as well as those who heard it read aloud in public spaces 
could imagine themselves member of an imagined national community of Iranians. The gazette, 
as the first government one that was published uninterruptedly, popularised journal reading 
among Iranians. Moreover, through reports of modern inventions and discoveries as well as 
liberal democratic institutions abroad, especially in Europe and the New World, the Qajar gazette 
exposed Iranians to manifestations of European modernity and liberal democracy. Although Iran 
did not experience a democratic movement until the turn of the twentieth century constitutional 
movement, Vaqaye‘-e Ettefaqiyeh was an important first step in Iranians’ transition to modernity 
and liberal democracy in later decades.
 
instructors and publishing house. Third, proliferation of travelogues of Iranian merchants, students, and ambassadors 
to Europe. Fourth, translation of European historical novels and fiction. Adamiyat 1992: 153.
96 In Amanat’s opinion, there were two “prevailing genres of official historiography” for most of the nineteenth 
century: first, “the chronicles of conquest,” which were written from early nineteenth century until 1857; and 
second, “the chronicles of the Nasiri period,” which were hybrids of annals and European almanacs and were written 
from the middle of the nineteenth century until the first decade of the twentieth century. They often contained 
“reports of royal campaigns, frontier skirmishes and civil unrest, diplomatic exchanges and treaties, royal and 
official birth and death registers as well as popular uprisings, heresies, natural calamities, and oddities.” Amanat 
2012. 
97 Farzin Vejdani studies the development of Iranian historiography between 1860 and 1940. In Vejdani’s view, a 
major conduit for exposure of Iran to foreign history and contemporary historical developments in the outside world 
was the Qajar translation bureau, which monopolised translation of European-language histories in the second half 
of the nineteenth century. Vejdani maintains, in selecting foreign histories for translation, the court translators had 
“the dual purpose of legitimizing the Qajar dynasty and providing individual rulers with exemplary models for topdown modernisation in the form of biographies of European autocrats.” Vejdani 2014: 18.
28
Bibliography
Adamiyat, F.1961. Fekr-e Azadi va Moqaddameh-ye Nehzat-e Mashrutiyat, Tehran, Nashr-e Sokhan
---. 1984. Amir Kabir va Iran, 7th ed, Tehran, Kharazmi.
---. 1992. Andisheh-ha-ye Mirza Aqa Khan Kermani, Saarbrucken, Entesharat-e Navid.
Afary, J. 1996. The Iranian Constitutional Revolution, 1906-1911 Grassroots Democracy, Social Democracy & the 
Origins of Feminism, New York, Columbia University Press.
Afshar, M. M. 1970. Safarnameh-ye Khosrow Mirza be Petersburq, (Edited by Muhammad Golbon), Tehran, 
Mostowfi.
Altick, R. D. 1998. The English Common Reader. A Social History of the Mass Reading Public, 1800-1900, Second 
Edition, Columbus, Ohio State University Press.
Amanat, A. 1997. Pivot of the Universe: Naser al-Din Shah Qajar and the Iranian Monarchy, 1831-1896, Berkeley,
University of California Press.
---. 2012. “Historiography, viii: Qajar Period,” EIr, ttp://www.iranicaonline.org/articles/historiography-viii
Amin, C. M. 2014. “The Press and Public Diplomacy in Iran, 1820–1940”, Iranian Studies, 48:2: 269-287.
Amini, I. 1999. Napoleon and Persia: Franco-Persian Relations under the First Empire, Surrey, Curzon Press.
Amir Arjomand, S. 1984. The Shadow of God and the Hidden Imam: Religion, Political Order, and Societal Change 
in Shi’ite Iran from the Beginning to 1890, Chicago, The University of Chicago Press.
---. 1988. The Turban for the Crown: The Islamic Revolution in Iran, New York, Oxford University Press.
Anderson, B. 2006. Imagined Communities: Reflections on the Origin and Spread of Nationalism. London, Verso.
Ansari, Z. 2011. “An Analysis of the Linguistic and Thematic Characteristics of Vaqaye‘-e Ettefaqiyeh Newspaper”,
Contemporary Persian Literature, Humanities and Cultural Studies Research Center, Year 1: No. 1, Spring 
and Summer 2011: 1-23.
Arianpour, Y. 1979. Az Saba ta Nima, Vol 1, Tehran, Sherkat-e Sahami-ye Ketab-ha-ye Jibi.
Azarang, A. H. 2015. Tarikh-e Tarjomeh dar Iran: Az Dowran-e Bastan ta Payan-e ‘Asr-e Qajar, Tehran,
Ghoghnus.
Balaghi, S. 2001. “Print Culture in Late Qajar Iran: The Cartoons of ‘Kashkūl’”, Iranian Studies, Vol. 34, No. 1/4, 
Qajar Art and Society: 165-181.
Bamdad, M. 2009. Sharh-e Rejal-e Iran dar Qarn-e 12 wa 13 wa 14 Hejri, Vol. 1, Tehran: Entesharat-e Zuvvar.
Dabashi, H. 2016. Iran Without Borders: Towards a Critique of the Postcolonial Nation, London, Verso. 
Forqani, M. M. and Hamzei M. 2013. “Baztab-e Mollefeh-ha-ye Farhang-e Modern dar Matbu‘at-e Asr-e Qajar”,
Faslnameh-ye ‘Olum-e Ejtima‘i, Summer, No. 61: 145-182.
E‘temad al-Saltaneh, M. H. 1889. Al-Ma‘aser va al-Asar , Tehran, The Special Government Printing House.
Greaves, R. 1991. “Iranian Relations with Great Britain and British India, 1798–1921”, in The Cambridge History of 
Iran, (Edited by P. Avery, G. R. G. Hambly and C. Melville). Cambridge, Cambridge University Press: 374–
425.
Grove, E. J. 2005. The Royal Navy Since 1815: A New Short History, London, Palgrave McMillan.
Hellot-Bellier, F. 2012. “France iii. Relations with Persia 1789-1918”, 
EIr, http://www.iranicaonline.org/articles/france-iii-relations-with-persia-1789-1918
29
Kianfar, J. 2009. “Matbu‘at-r Dowlati-ye Iran dar ‘Asr-i Qajar”, Payam-i Baharestan, Year 1, No. 3, Spring: 273-
299.
Lorentz, J. H. 1974. “Modernisation and Political Change in Nineteenth-Century Iran: The Role of Amir Kabir”,
PhD diss., Princeton University.
Mahbubi Ardakani, H. 1992. Tarikh-e Mo‘assesat-e Tamadduni-ye Jadid dar Iran, Vol. 1, Tehran, Tehran 
University Press.
Martin, V. 2009. Anglo-Iranian Relations since 1800, London, Routledge.
McLuhen, M. 1994. Understanding Media: The Extensions of Man, Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press.
Menshari, D. 1992. Education and the Making of Modern Iran, Ithaca and London, Cornell University Press.
Nabavi, Negin. 2012. “Journalism in Qajar Period”, EIr, http://www.iranicaonline.org/articles/journalism-i-qajarperiod
Price, R. 2001. Napoleon III and the Second Empire, London, Routledge.
Rajaei, A. M. 2000. “Naqsh-e Ruznameh-ye Vaqaye‘-e Ettefaqiyeh dar Enteqal-e Amuzeh-ha-ye Jadide Siyasi beh 
Jame‘e-ye Iran”, Rasanah, Year 11, No. 1: 76-81.
Rezvani, M. E. 1995. “Introduction”, Ruznameh-ye Vaqaye‘-e Ettefaqiyeh, 4 Vols. Tehran: National Library: i-x.
Ringer, M. M. 2001. Education, Religion, and the Discourse of Cultural Reform in Qajar Iran, Costa Mesa, CA,
Mazda Publishers, Inc.
Sadr Hashemi, M. 1984. Tarikh-e Jarayid va Majallat-e Iran, Vol. 1 and 2, Tehran, Entesharat-e Kamal.
Sheikholeslami, A. R. 1997. The Structure of Central Authority in Qajar Iran, 1871-1896, Atlanta, Scholars Press.
Shirazi, M. S. 1983. Gozaresh-e Safar-e Mirza Saleh Shirazi, (Edited by Homayun Shahidi), Tehran, Entesharat-e 
Rah-e Nou.
Tabatabaei, M. 1996. Tarikh-e Tahlili-ye Matbu‘at-e Iran, Tehran, Rudaki.
Talattof, K. 2015. “Early Twentieth Century Journals in Iran: Response to Modernity in Literary Reviews”, In
Literature of the Early Twentieth Century: From the Constitutional Period to Reza Shah: A History of Persian 
Literature, (Edited by A. A. Seyed-Gohrarb), London, I. B. Tauris: 411-447.
Tarbiyat, M. M. A. K, and Browne E. G. 1914. The Press and Poetry of Modern Persia, Cambridge, Cambridge 
University Press.
Tavakoli-Targhi, M. 2001. Refashioning Iran: Orientalism, Occidentalism, and Historiography, New York,
Palgrave.
Vejdani, F. 2014. Making History in Iran: Education, Nationalism, and Print Culture, Stanford, California, Stanford 
University Press.
Woodcroft, B. 1857. Chronological Index of Patents Applied for and Patents Granted, for the Year 1856, London,
Great Seal Patent Office.
Wright, D. 1977. The English Amongst the Persians: During the Qajar Period 1787-1921, London, Heinemann.
Ruznameh-ye Vaqaye‘-e Ettefaqiyeh, 4 Vols, (Edited by Muhammad Esmaeil Rezwani), Tehran, National Library.
The Illustrated London News. London: The Illustrated London News & Sketch Ltd. 
https://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015066472278.