Forever Russian – Memoirs of a Vagabond Prince

by Georges Obolensky

(Published in 2013 - see Amazon) 

Background

Georges Obolensky was born in Teheran on December 31st 1920.  His full title was Prince Yuri Yurevitch Obolensky but he preferred to be known as Georges.

This memoir was written when he was 90 years old. Georges died in 2011 and the book was subsequently published by his wife, Rhoda.


An extract from Chapter 1......

“..in 1925 my father succumbed (to Malaria). I was but a few months short of my fifth birthday at the time and only vaguely remember him. Soon after my father's death, my mother was asked to manage a bed-and-breakfast-type hotel with 40 plus single cabins. She was fluent in English, French and German, which is probably why she got the job. Oddly enough, for someone of her aristocratic background, she also turned out to be quite an astute businesswoman. She had no problems attracting guests who were sent by their respective companies from Europe for short-term assignments to meet with their local managements. My mother was very successful in helping her business guests deal with the Persian bureaucracy. She also had an Armenian assistant who was fluent in Farsi and Russian to help with these tedious chores.

As for me, I grew up attending a French grammar school run by a certain Mlle. Tomassin.  As a child my life was lonely and dull. My mother was always busy with her duties at the bed and breakfast, which didn't leave much time for me. I had little daily contact with her, no family life to speak of and hardly any friends. When she did have free time she usually spent it with her friend, Dr Stump, a Swiss dentist practicing in Teheran. He was the only dentist in Teheran at that time.  He was also the owner of the B and B my mother managed and expanded. I didn't realize, of course that their relationship was more than just a friendship. On reflecting back upon that part of my life, as a callow boy I couldn't know nor understood the loneliness mother felt as a young widow after the death of my father, living in a strange country with no close friends or relatives.”
 
In 1930, at the age of 10, Georges was sent to France to live with his uncle and aunt, and to go to a French school. Georges finished his education in France, survived the 2nd World War fighting with the French Army and then internment in a Prisoner of War camp. After the war he went to America to University and married an American woman Rhoda. He didn't see his mother until 1954 when he visited Teheran on business and stayed with his mother.

The story continues in Chapter 9 …..

“ During the three weeks I spent in Iran, while staying with my mother, many long personal conversations took place. During the years of my living in France, my mother had married her long time amour Dr. Stump. He died not long before I arrived in Teheran (actually in 1951). My mother felt it very important to explain to me how very unhappy and lonely she had been with her single life in Iran.”

Georges mother, Vera, eventually left Teheran and came to live with with him and Rhoda in Frankfurt. Georges and Rhoda, and children, returned to America in 1964 and Vera joined them in New Jersey. Vera died in America in 1975. 
JPH  07/01/2014





