   Yet there is little Bakhtiyari history to speak of before the Safavid period.
Medieval geographers described the peoples of the Zagros but made no men-
tion of the Bakhtiyari, referring instead to Kurds and Lurs. The Persian his-
torian Abu Ja‘far al-Tabari was among the first to write of the “Kurds” in his
History of Prophets and Kings. The tenth-century author Mas‘udi listed the Lur-
riya tribes as Kurds. According to the medieval geographer Ibn Hawqal, “Lur
was a prosperous country with a mountain climate attached to the provinces
of Khuzistsan and Jabal . . . the great majority of the population is Kurd.”14
This view was later confirmed by al-Yaqut’s geographical dictionary, written in
the Mongol period. It mentions the Lur as a “Kurd tribe living in the moun-
tains between Khuzistan and Isfahan”—the land known as bilad al-Lur.15 In
Sharafnama-yi Tarikh-i Mufassal-i Kurdistan, Amir Sharaf Khan Bidlisi counts
the Bakhtiyari as among the 400 Kurdish clans that migrated from Syria (bilad
al-sham) to Jabal and Khuzistan around the beginning of the twelfth century,
coming to be known as Lur-i Buzurg. Among these tribes were the Bakhti-
yari, the Astaraki, the Javaniki (Janiki), the Gutvand, the Jaki, the Liravi, the
Mamasani, and two Arab tribes called the ‘Akili and the Hashimi.16 The four-
teenth-century geographer Hamdallah Mustawfi called their territory Jabal,
Arabic for “mountains,” and mentioned the snow-covered peak of Zard Kuh,
the source of the Dujayl (Karun) River, which flowed through Khuzistan, and
Zayanda Rud, which flowed into Isfahan.17
   During the sixteenth century, as the Safavids moved the capital of Iran
from the northwestern cities of Tabriz and Qazvin further south to the more
centrally located Isfahan, the state came into proximity with the Zagros
Mountains, home to the largest concentration of pastoral nomadic tribes in
Iran.18 Safavid chronicles and administrative manuals contain scattered refer-
ences to the Bakhtiyari.19 These sources chronicle the Safavids’ penetration of
the Zagros Mountains and contact with the “Bakhtiyari Lurs,” whom they
sought to consolidate under tribal leadership and thus integrate into the fabric
of the empire.
   In the 1560s Shah Tahmasp (1524–1576) tried to bring order to the Bakhti-
yari tribes and assert state control over them. He first granted the title of sar-
dar (commander) to Tajmir, a chief of the Astaraki clan, whom he held to be
the most powerful khan among the Bakhtiyari Lurs. But following Tajmir’s
failure to collect taxes and establish order among the tribes, the shah had him
executed and gave the office to Jahangir, a Bakhtiyari khan put in charge of
supplying the Safavids with 10,000 mules yearly. This seems to have estab-
lished the taxation of the Bakhtiyari and might have been the time when the


20   on the periphery of nineteenth-century ir an