and the pastoral, that “one should live in civilized places or else the moun-
tains” (dar mamalik-i mutamadduna ya jabal), he again left for Europe, seek-
ing treatment for his failing eyesight.18
   Sardar As‘ad was one of several Bakhtiyari khans vying for power and pres-
tige. Among them was Najaf Quli Khan Samsam al-Saltana, who in contrast
to Sardar As‘ad, his younger half-brother, was a more traditional Lur leader
with a reputation for bravery in raids and forays. Before he had reached fifteen
years of age, his father had dispatched him to lead a thousand horsemen on a
raid against Arab tribes in Khuzistan.19 Samsam al-Saltana became ilkhan of
the Bakhtiyari after the death of Muhammad Husayn Khan Sipahdar in 1905,
but the following year Sardar As‘ad replaced him in the post. Subsequent to
his removal from office Samsam al-Saltana permitted his followers to raid cara-
vans on the roads to Isfahan, thus discrediting Sardar As‘ad’s leadership. He
also incited the Lurs of Kuhgilu to rob the oil fields and plunder sections of the
Bakhtiyari Road, difficulties that led to a reversal of policy and to his reinstate-
ment as ilkhan by the central government in 1907.20 His replacement again the
following year, when Muhammad ‘Ali Shah appointed Khusraw Khan Sardar
Zafar as ilkhan, certainly contributed to his decision to declare his support for
the constitutionalists of Isfahan.
   With the ascension of Muhammad ‘Ali Shah to the throne, Lutf ‘Ali Khan
Amir Mufakhkham (formerly Shuja al-Sultan) of the Hajji Ilkhani Bakhtiyari,
who had served Muhammad ‘Ali Shah during his days as crown prince and
governor of Azarbayjan, was appointed as the head of the royal guard in the
capital. Following the coup in 1908 and the subsequent revolt in Tabriz, the
shah ordered Amir Mufakhkham to gather a cavalry of Bakhtiyari horsemen to
put it down. Soon 500 horsemen were sent from the yaylaq to Tehran to receive
the shah’s orders.21 Amir Mufakhkham gained support from other members of
the Hajji Ilkhani clan and network, including his younger brother and tribal
strongman Nasir Khan Sardar Jang (formerly Sarim al-Mulk), commander of
the tribal cavalry stationed in Tehran. Although Sardar Jang was “poorer in
property” than the other ruling chiefs, he was known as “a man of force and
determination.”22 Once committed to the defense of Muhammad ‘Ali Shah
Qajar, he did not quit the task. In October 1908, it was reported that he had left
to quell the uprising in Tabriz at the head of 500 Bakhtiyari horsemen.23 Sultan
Muhammad Khan Sardar Ashja‘, the commander of the Bakhtiyari Horse in
Khuzistan, halfheartedly sided with his brothers Amir Mufakhkham and Sar-
dar Jang, although the headmen loyal to him were hesitant to support the des-
potic Muhammad ‘Ali Shah. Khusraw Khan Sardar Zafar of the Ilkhani family


164   the bakhtiyari and the constitutional revolution