also joined the loyalist khans and was instrumental in gathering horsemen for
Tehran. In 1908, Muhammad ‘Ali Shah appointed Sardar Zafar ilkhan of the
Bakhtiyari, replacing his rival half-brother Samsam al-Saltana.24 In 1909, how-
ever, after Bakhtiyari revolutionaries had taken possession of Isfahan, Sardar
As‘ad convinced Sardar Zafar to switch sides and withdraw his support from
the shah. Intra-tribal rivalries as well as the desire to be on the victorious side
thus shaped the Bakhtiyari’s participation in the Constitutional Revolution.
Moreover, lasting memories of the murder of Husayn Quli Khan Ilkhani in
1882 would remain a source of Bakhtiyari enmity toward the Qajars that they
would vent during the revolution.25
   The Bakhtiyari retinues summoned by the loyalist khans for the defense of
Muhammad ‘Ali Shah were hosted generously upon their arrival in the capital,
being taken to Bagh-i Shah, where they were allowed to set up their tents.26
However, after it was announced that the tribesmen should prepare to march
on Tabriz with Amir Mufakhkham, they refused to go, claiming they could
not ride behind a chief who preferred the royal court to his own tribe.27 The
Bakhtiyari horsemen in Tehran simply sought to return to the tribal territory
in the Zagros Mountains. Iskandar Khan ‘Akkasha of the Babadi tribe, whose
men, along with regiments from the Chahar Lang and the Bakhtiyarvand,
were among those loyal to and being paid by Sultan Muhammad Khan, left a
rare account in his memoirs of the mood of the Bakhtiyari cavalry in Tehran in
late 1908. As the Bakhtiyari cavalries disbanded in Tehran, some detachments
drifted toward the constitutionalists. From their sanctuary in Shah ‘Abd al-
‘Azim Mosque the constitutionalists sought to convince the tribesmen to switch
sides, luring them with offers of cash and “worldly possessions” (mal-i dunya).28
The news of this possible link worried Muhammad ‘Ali Shah. In an effort to
avoid the shah’s anger, the khans in Tehran scrambled to rein in their indepen-
dent-minded retinues. Sultan Muhammad Khan, who was personally wavering
as to which path to take, visited Iskandar Khan ‘Akkasha’s encampment outside
Tehran and sought to convince him to back the shah. Iskandar Khan claims
to have responded to this request by reminding Sultan Muhammad Khan that
“all the people of Iran seek the constitution (mashruta talab mibashand), and it
will not be long until this is accomplished, so why not make a good name for
yourself” by defending it. 29 With great difficulties and despite much reluctance,
Sultan Muhammad and the other khans in Tehran had persuaded the Bakhtiyari
horsemen to march to Tabriz under Amir Mufakhkham when news arrived that
Bakhtiyari retinues led by Samsam al-Saltana and Ibrahim Khan Zargham al-
Saltana had taken Isfahan on behalf of the constitutionalists.30


      the bakhtiyari and the constitutional revolution     165