   (khun-i pak-i Irani) in their body would not take part in the oppres-
   sion of Iran. . . . One hundred Bakhtiyari and Qashqa’i tribes, if they
   opposed this movement, would become defeated and filled with
    regret.58

Habl al-Matin appealed to the tribes to become involved in the revolution
and to embrace the Iranian homeland. In the revolutionary press, tribal khans
and headmen were no longer simply regarded as the chieftains of their respec-
tive confederacies and tribes but as the commanders of the people (sardaran-i
milli).
   The values of the Bakhtiyari chimed with those of Sattar Khan, the hero
of Tabriz and icon of the revolution, whom they much admired and sought to
emulate as folk revolutionaries. The Bakhtiyari found appeal in Sattar Khan’s
humble origins, his bravery, and his appearance of rustic masculinity. Well
armed and accompanied by his retinues, Sattar Khan provided a revolutionary
image and myth of brave men palatable to the Bakhtiyari. In Tarikh-i Bakhti-
yari, Sattar Khan is lauded as the commander of the people (sardar-i milli) and
is credited with inspiring the Bakhtiyari’s entry into Isfahan and the Constitu-
tional Revolution. According to the tribal history, “Due to the example of the
resistance of Sattar Khan, the commander of the people in Azarbayjan, and
the defeat of the government troops, most of the lands of Iran have become
mobilized.”59 This theme was registered in the revolutionary press in newslet-
ters such as Habl al-Matin, which counted the Bakhtiyari khans as among the
sardaran-i milli, lauding the bravery of their men (mardan) with slogans fol-
lowing their entry into Isfahan: “Long live Hajji ‘Ali Quli Khan Sardar As‘ad
/ Everlasting the endeavors of men / Uplifting the people of Iran.”60 Other slo-
gans linked the Bakhtiyari to Sattar Khan and the insurgents of Azarbayjan:
“Long live (zindabad) Samsam al-Saltana and Sattar Khan who raised up the
great name of Iran.”61 Circa 1909 Habl al-Matin and other nationalist newslet-
ters depicted the Bakhtiyari khans as brave men and commanders of warlike
revolutionary armies.
   Following the capture of Isfahan Habl al-Matin and other nationalist news-
letters reported the event and depicted the Bakhtiyari ilkhan as a national hero.
In Habl al-Matin, there was speculation that Samsam al-Saltana had 100,000
Bakhtiyari horsemen behind him ready to capture Tehran if they marched on
the capital, bringing “woe to the clan of the Qajars.”62 The Bakhtiyari upris-
ing, it was thought and hoped, would lead the Qashqa’i to act in Fars and the
Kalhur Kurds to rise up in Kirmanshah.63 Chihra Nama, a Persian newslet-


172   the bakhtiyari and the constitutional revolution