   Incendiary letters from Sardar As‘ad appeared in the pages of Kashkul, Zay-
anda Rud and Jahad-i Akbar. In June 1909, the following letter from Sardar
As‘ad appeared in the Isfahan newspaper Kashkul as the Bakhtiyari were on
their way to Tehran:

    I would like to remind all that the headmen of the Bakhtiyari are not
   thinking about hukumat and saltanat and live content lives. And I
   was in Europe for diversion and treatment. But upon hearing for ten
   months about the behavior of the shah and his court and after being
   advised by the maraji‘-yi Islam and Europeans that the only way for
   saving Iran is through mashruta, I decided to do what I could for the
   sake of my religion and homeland. . . . And nothing can scare or stop
   me. I am not worried at all about the military camp at Kashan. The
   only way I’ll stop and return is when I hear the news of mashrutiyat.
   Send the news to our brothers in Azarbayjan and Gilan, and the
   people of Tehran, we will all be at Baharistan. Long live the people
   of Iran. Long live freedom. Martyr of the people of Iran (Zindabad
    millat-i Iran. Zindabad azadi. Fada-yi millat-i Iran), ‘Ali Quli Khan
    Bakhtiyari.94

Here Sardar As‘ad invokes the Bakhtiyari’s love of the homeland and their
brave commitment to upholding the constitution. The satirical cartoon par-
odies the weakness of the shah’s troops in the face of the bold and daring
horsemen of the Bakhtiyari. They are honored as “The Victorious Rifles of the
People” (Qushun-i Zafarnimun-i Milli), while the government troops are lam-
pooned as deserters fearful of even the thought of confrontation with the mar-
tial tribes. In the caricature, they are seen uttering cowardly remarks as they
drop their rifles and flee from the advance of Sardar As‘ad’s retinues, one of
them seeking a mouse hole (yak surakh-i mush) in which to hide from the war-
like tribes.95 News arrived to the consuls’ dismay that Samsam al-Saltana had
gathered reinforcements estimated at “about six hundred Bakhtiyari mounted
rifles” for his brother.96 In a series of dispatches on the “Bakhtiyari Advance,”
published in the Times in late June 1909, Fraser suggested that the Bakhtiyari
aimed “to dethrone the Shah.”97 There was widespread panic and fear of loot-
ing in Tehran as word spread that the Bakhtiyari tribesmen were on the way.
   Meanwhile, on the outskirts of the capital, Nasir Khan Sardar Jang and
400 horsemen returned from Tabriz and joined Amir Mufakhkham’s retinues,
who had ridden from Khalidabad to Kashan to Qum in pursuit of Sardar As‘ad


180   the bakhtiyari and the constitutional revolution