man into confusion.” After the Bakhtiyari charged they fled via the Mashhad
Road to the Khurasan frontier, leaving 60 to 70 dead, 300 to 400 wounded
and captured.109 In the late summer and early fall of 1911, the ex-Shah’s brother,
Salar al-Dawla, gathered thousands of Kurdish tribes in northwestern Iran,
marched on Kirmanshah and Hamadan, then advanced on Tehran.110 To meet
this threat the Bakhtiyari cavalry, joined again by Yeprem Khan’s volunteers
and artillery, marched against Salar al-Dawla’s Kurdish troops and defeated
them at the village of Bagh-i Shah.111
   In the summer of 1910, Bakhtiyari tribesmen were dispatched along with
the forces of Yeprem Khan to disarm the nearly 1,000 unemployed, gun-tot-
ing volunteers from Azarbayjan and Gilan who were scattered throughout
the streets of Tehran.112 These freedom fighters and mujahidin gathered and
held demonstrations at Atabayg Park near the foreign legations. In August the
grassroots hero Sattar Khan and some 300 followers barricaded themselves
in Atabayg. They refused to give up their arms, precipitating a shootout with
government forces that included the Bakhtiyari. The Bakhtiyari tribes thus
clashed with Sattar Khan, a figure who had precipitated their own entry into
the struggle for mashrutiyat. 113 By August 1910, the Bakhtiyari cavalry and
the followers of Sattar Khan had ended up on opposing sides. In the shoot-
out at Atabayg Park, the Bakhtiyari defeated the volunteers. Sattar Khan was
wounded in the skirmish and unceremoniously removed from the revolution-
ary stage. Later in the century, however, it would be Sattar Khan and the vol-
unteers from Tabriz, not the Bakhtiyari, who would be remembered as icons
of the Iranian Constitutional Revolution.
   The Bakhtiyari also faced resistance from otherwise pro-constitutional
tribes that resented their domination of the central government. In the south,
the heavily armed Qashqa’i tribes of Fars and their ilkhan, Isma‘il Khan Saw-
lat al-Dawla, supported the constitution but challenged the Bakhtiyari when
they meddled in the affairs of Fars. Among the most influential figures in
Fars during the constitutional period, the Qashqa’i ilkhan sought to harness
the revolution to gain prestige for the Qashqa’i, as had been the case for the
Bakhtiyari. In April 1907, when popular demonstrations broke out in Shiraz
against Qavam al-Mulk, the chief of the Khamsa tribes and provincial rivals of
the Qashqa’i, Sawlat al-Dawla entered the town at the head of a large group of
Qashqa’i tribesmen in support of the constitution and contributed 800 tumans
to the popular party. In January 1909, rumors circulated in the south that
as a result of the Bakhtiyari’s success in Isfahan the Qashqa’i chief was being
incited to try a similar coup in Fars.114


      the bakhtiyari and the constitutional revolution     183